10.1016/j.jasrep.2018.08.013

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Diachronic variation in secondary burial practices in Bronze and Iron Age Moravia

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Mortuary practices in Central Europe changed radically during the Bronze Age (Brandt et al., 2014; Harding and Fokkens, 2013; Harding, 2000; Sørensen and Rebay, 2008).

By the Early Bronze Age (EBA; 2200–1500 BCE) the dominant ritual is characterized by relatively uniform primary inhumations of complete bodies.

During the Middle Bronze Age (1500–1300 BCE) cremation becomes more prevalent (Stuchlík, 1993).

This change spread across Continental Europe with the Urnfield culture in Late Bronze and Early Iron Age from 1300 to 700 BCE.

The break between the Late Bronze and Early Iron Age (LBA/EIA) in Central Europe corresponds with two phases of the Lusatian culture.

During the transition from inhumation to cremation, secondary burials gradually increase with their methods and characteristics changing over time (Rulf, 1996; Stuchlík, 2010).

PARAGRAPH

The reason for the great transition and function of the cremation is unknown.

The traditional explanation of the transition from inhumation to cremation considers population movement and changing ethnicity to be the primary cause (Kimmig, 1964; Reinecke, 1900) with other potential causal factors related to wealth, politics and social stratification (Urban, 2000).

More recently, Flohr Sørensen and Bille (2008) and Harris et al. (2013) remark that the transition is not part of any great ideological or political transformation and that changes occurred only on a regional level.

The primary function of cremation might have been to quickly and simply fragment a body to acquire clean bone fragments for other ritualistic needs, like curation (Flohr Sørensen and Bille, 2008; Rebay-Salisbury, 2010).

PARAGRAPH

Changes in body treatment within secondary burials are not well explored.

Little, if any, empirical research of diachronic change in these mortuary practices exists for Central Europe.

Regardless, it would be surprising to discover that changes in primary mortuary rituals from inhumation to cremation did not coincide with changes in secondary practices.

Cremation and the practice of secondary burial of unburnt human bones, may reflect two means to the same ends: to fragment a human body for social needs, such as curation, circulation away from the mortuary site, and redistribution within the community (Cerezo-Román et al., 2017; Cerezo-Román and Williams, 2014; Rebay-Salisbury, 2010).

PARAGRAPH

Secondary burials, in an archaeological sense, are characterized by skeletal disarticulation which occurred prior to final disposal, and the underrepresentation of certain small bones (Schroeder, 2001).

Secondary burial is any subsequent burial, irrespective of the number of previous exhumations or bone relocations (Burns, 1999).

Harrisson (1967) defines secondary burial as human skeletal remains broken up in a way presupposing major disintegration of the flesh and ligaments after primary burial, exhumation, retreatment, and redeposition of the bones during secondary rites (Sprague, 2005).

According to (Kuijt, 1996), who integrated ethnographic and archaeological data about Levantine Neolithic communities, secondary manipulation with inhumed unburnt bones is a complex and sanctioned social act.

He understands secondary manipulation with human remains as the development and expansion of ritual practices that emphasized collective community beliefs and identity.

Archaeologically, secondary burials are expressed as intentional removal of bones from one location to another, and are represented by the recovery of disarticulated and incomplete skeletal remains (Kuijt, 1996).

Secondary burials also comprise transformation of the body into fragments, and its final integration into a form of custody.

In addition, body fragmentation allows the descendants to distribute remains of their relatives within the community in the form of relics (Cerezo-Román, 2015; Ezzo, 2007).

The distribution and sharing of bone fragments is reflective of social roles and relationships between the living and the dead.

Nevertheless, the term secondary burial is just interpretative; it understands the act as resulting from ritual activities.

Aside from ritual activities, secondary burials can result from other, sometimes accidental events including mass graves from epidemics and war (Pérez, 2012), cannibalism (Hurlbut, 2000; Knüsel and Robb, 2016), post-depositional processes (Beckett, 2011; Chroustovský and Průchová, 2011) and disturbance of older graves (Knüsel and Robb, 2016).

Therefore, Knüsel and Robb (2016) used the more neutral phrase secondary deposition.

PARAGRAPH

The most important question for this study is what kind of excarnation was conducted and how did it change over time.

There are three excarnation methods which leave traces on bones (Smith and Brickley, 2009): 1) excarnation by primary burial; 2) excarnation by exposure; 3) excarnation with tools.

The first two practices are considered passive, the third as an active method of excarnation.

Excarnation by primary burial is through temporary burial in a primary grave to allow for natural soft tissues decomposition (Sprague, 2005).

Excarnation through exposure leaves the body above ground in a place that allows scavenging (Colard et al., 2014).

Excarnation by active flesh removal, is by butchering with tools (White and Folkens, 2005).

Cremation is also often considered a form of excarnation (Larsson and Stutz, 2014).

Each method leaves specific traces on bone.

While these traces are not mutually exclusive to excarnation methods, and various methods are used in combination which leaves overlapping traces, they do help with the interpretation of the archaeological context.

Excarnation methods and characteristic indicators are presented in Table 1.

SECTION

Known secondary burial sites in Moravia

PARAGRAPH

Secondary deposition of human bones in the Bronze and Iron Age are relatively frequent in Moravia (Rulf, 1996; Stuchlík, 2010).

To date, 34 sites with secondary bone deposits have been found (Fig. 1, Appendix 1).

The best known sites are the Cezava near Blučina hillfort which spans from the Bronze to Early Iron Age (Jelínek, 1990, 1993; Salaš, 1986), the Late Bronze Age hillfort at Hradisko near Kroměříž (Jelínek, 1954; Spurný, 1954) and the hillfort at Obřany in Brno (Adámek, 1961).

Worth noting outside Moravia is the Skalka near Velim, Late Bronze Age enclosure with several ditch circuits containing disarticulated bones (Outram et al., 2005).

From the Early Iron Age, the best known sites with secondary deposits are the Býčí skála Cave (Stloukal, 1981; Wankel, 1882) and Tabulová Hora hillfort in Mikulov (Říhovský, 1955).

The interpretation of secondary depositions is difficult.

The hillfort deposits were considered evidence of social violence, while deposits in settlement pits were interpreted as ritual sites connected to sacrifice, cannibalism, or execution (Salaš, 1986).

Disarticulated bones may also result from other post depositional processes such as natural surface runoff, or re-excavation for new construction.

Findings of older excavations are hard to analyze and revise due to the absence of detailed field documentation and context.

In this study, I investigate only “secondary burials” from settlement pits, which were excavated in the field by the author in an effort to reduce bias.

SECTION

Archaeological context

PARAGRAPH

Between 2006 and 2014, a number of large-scale rescue excavations took place in Moravia (eastern part of the Czech Republic) during the construction of D1 Highway and several family houses around city of Olomouc Fig. 1.

Six multi-period sites comprised, amongst others, 14 finding contexts with disarticulated human and non-human bones dated to either Early Bronze Age or Late Bronze and Early Iron Age (the latter two phases belonging to Silesian and Platenice phases of the Lusatian culture).

Disarticulated human remains were discovered at sites Křenovice - Vinice, Hulín - Pravčice 1, Bystročice - U Topolánky, Stříbrnice 1, Vrchoslavice Vitčice 1, and Chrášťany (Fig. 1, Appendix 1).

The first site, Křenovice – Vinice (Tajer, 2009a), consisted of 65 features dated to LBA/EIA.

Two pits contained a deposition of commingled human and non-human bones.

The site at Křenovice - Vinice may have been an economic base for a nearby fortified settlement which is, however, known only from fieldwalking survey and is of unprecise age (Peška and Plaček, 2002).

On the second site, Hulín - Pravčice 1 (Hadrava, personal communication, June 8, 2018), 327 excavated features were dated to LBA/EIB, six of them contained deposits with disarticulated human and non-human bones.

However, four of these finds were labelled as uncertain.

It was possibly a phalange in the infill of a settlement pit, or a find recorded in the post-excavation phase.

The same site also comprised 341 settlement features from EBA, four of which contained articulated and semi-articulated human remains.

All these EBA features are included in this study.

At the Bystročice - U Topolánky site (Tajer, 2009b), 51 settlement features dated to EBA were recorded, one of them containing semi-articulated human remains.

At Stříbrnice 1 site (Tajer, 2009c), 14 features dated to EBA were recorded, one settlement pit containing disarticulated and semi-articulated human remains.

The site Vrchoslavice Vitčice 1 (Tajer, 2009d) comprised 100 settlement features dated to EBA, two pits containing disarticulated and semi-articulated human remains.

Another 17 pits contained human remains with some degree of uncertainty as these were only discovered in post-excavation phase.

At the Chrášťany site (Paulus, 2011), 227 settlement features dated to EBA were recorded, three settlement pits contained disarticulated and semi-articulated human and non-human remains.

SECTION

Aim

PARAGRAPH

This study attempts to reconstruct and explain the diachronic change in secondary burial excarnation practices in Bronze and Early Iron Age Moravia.

I show that the Central European Bronze Age represents a period of significant change not only within the dominant funerary rite, but also within secondary mortuary treatment.

SECTION

Material and methods

SECTION

Osteological sample

PARAGRAPH

The osteological material utilised in this study was discovered at six Moravian sites mentioned above Fig. 1.

All sites are multi-period prehistoric settlements, situated in close proximity to one another.

A total number of 23 skeletons and 596 bones were investigated; 13 skeletons (323 bones) were dated to EBA and ten skeletons (274 bones) to LBA/EIA.

These human remains are referred to by their find numbers in Table 2.

Fig. 2 shows two examples (Chrášťany 63/802, 803 and Hulín – Pravčice 1216/825) of finding contexts with secondary burials discussed in this study.

SECTION

Demographic analysis

PARAGRAPH

The remains were grouped into infants, juveniles and adults (Scheuer and Black, 2000).

Age at death of infants and juveniles was estimated by dentition (Ubelaker, 1999) and the degree of epiphyseal union of the long bones (Ferembach et al., 1980).

Estimation of age at death in adults used a variety of criteria, including: morphology of the pubic symphysis (Brooks and Suchey, 1990), auricular area of the pelvis (Buckberry and Chamberlain, 2002), and dental abrasion (Lovejoy, 1985).

The sex of adult skeletons was determined by assessing pelvic attributes (Bruzek, 2002) or skull morphology (Ferembach et al., 1980).

Stature was estimated by regression formulae of long bone measurements (Sjøvold, 1990).

SECTION

Taphonomic analysis

PARAGRAPH

Field recording consisted of standard data collection (Brothwell, 1981; McKinley, 2004; White and Folkens, 2005).

The excavation of burials was followed by filling in field protocols, documentation drawn in scale 1:10, photography, and the careful recovery of bones.

The number of individuals per pit was recorded along with state of articulation, bone positions and their relationship to the pit environment, grave goods and non-human bones.

These variables were recorded in order to distinguish human and non-human agents, including plants and animals, and to identify spatial arrangement of bones in corresponding archaeological features.

It was not possible to use archaeothanatological approach (Aspöck, 2018; Duday et al., 2009) due to time constraints characteristic for rescue excavations.

During the field excavation, we applied two levels of analysis (Duday et al., 2014).

First, we distinguished whether the subject was a corpse (primary deposit) or isolated bones (secondary deposit).

On the second level, it is necessary to prove that the manipulation with dry bones had been planned (secondary burial).

This notion of planning is essential for defining a secondary burial, the most difficult step of the analysis.

A frequently used criterion for defining planning is disorder in the arrangement of bones.

Another criterion is the absence of small bones, presumably forgotten or not selected from their primary grave (Duday et al., 2009).

In the strict sense, we defined secondary burial as an assemblage of more than one bone from one individual deposited in a recognizable archaeological feature.

Secondary burial is a subsequent placement of human remains, with persistent articulations in disarticulated state and with low number of bones of small dimension.

Uncertain findings, which might have been influenced by accidental surface runoff (secondary deposition), or of uncertain original position, were excluded from the analysis.

PARAGRAPH

In the laboratory, I quantified all fragments and recorded bone surface alterations.

Scores for skeletal completeness and preservation of cortical surfaces are divided in six classes according to (Bello et al., 2006).

The anatomic preservation index (API) and the qualitative bone index (QBI) were used for assessment of skeletal preservation.

The API was applied in order to reconstruct the origin of the remains, i.e. to use the composition of skeletal samples from all features to assess whether, at each period, the bones were intentionally collected from originally complete corpses.

This would mean leaving small bones (hand and feet bones) behind so that only larger bones such as skull, long bones and hip bones are found in secondary depositions.

API is the percentage of completeness of each bone element preserved in the skeletal remains.

Furthermore, each fragment was coded for abrasion/erosion (QBI) such as cracking and flaking seen in weathered bone.

QBI is the percentage of undisturbed cortical surface in each single bone.

The purpose of cortical surface coding is to identify body exposure before secondary deposition.

Bone exposure, moisture and temperature can change a bone's cortical surface.

Distinguishing human from nonhuman agents consisted of identifying diagnostic traits on the bones' surface.

Human manipulations include cut and chop marks, perimortem fractures, charring, and polishing.

The analysis of cut marks was made using the Olympus BX61 light microscope, the (SEM) JEOL JCM-5000 scanning electron microscope, and a digital Keyence VHX-5000 microscope.

Perimortem fractures were recorded according to the guidelines of (Symes et al., 2014).

Non-human agents left chewing or puncture marks (gnawing) on bones.

Roots of plants produce acids that damage the bone surface such as root mark grooves.

Modification caused by natural agents was recorded as present/absent (number of traits, skeletal distribution and surface of effected area).

SECTION

Statistical analysis

PARAGRAPH

For each of the 23 individuals we collected 14 data points: number of individuals per pit, state of articulation, pit placement, presence of non-human bones and grave goods, cut marks, chop marks, perimortem fractures, heat alteration, polishing, root mark grooves, gnawing, API and QBI.

Using SPSS 22, I examined for patterns amongst all variables and age, sex and culture.

The Chi-square (X2) statistic was used to examine whether there was a significant difference between the culture and all data points.

The statistical significance was set both to 0.05 and 0.10.

In addition, K-means was used for cluster analysis with standardized data and Euclidean distances and also for data visualization.

SECTION

Results

SECTION

Demographics

PARAGRAPH

There was no sex or age bias in the EBA and LBA/EIA group.

In the LBA/EIA group there were six adults (60.0%), one juvenile (10.0%) and three infants (30.0%).

Amongst adult skeletons, three males, one female, and two unsexed individuals were identified.

In the EBA group were eight adults (61.5%), three juveniles (23.1) and two infants (15.4%).

Four males and four females were identified amongst adults.

SECTION

Taphonomy

PARAGRAPH

Table 3 shows the summary of all observed taphonomic variables.

Significant differences are found between EBA and LBA/EIA secondary burials.

LBA/EIA remains are found in a larger number of pits with more than one individual in disarticulated state.

Burials were frequently intentionally modified by human agents, i.e. broken, processed with tools and polished.

In the EBA group, there was usually only one individual in a pit, skeletons were recorded in a semi-articulated state, without traces of intentional modification or human manipulation, but frequently modified by natural agents (roots and gnawing).

Completeness (API) in both samples was similar (Table 3).

The average API was 17.6% (n = 10; SD 19.2%) in the LBA/EIA group, and 18.4% (n = 13; SD 16.7%) in EBA.

Both groups were comprised of large numbers of skull bones and low numbers of small bones.

SECTION

Human agency

PARAGRAPH

Cut marks were found on seven individuals (77.0%) and 20 bones (11.2%) but only in the LBA/EIA group.

Cut mark locations correlate to disarticulation (Fig. 3), and sporadically also to defleshing.

The most striking finds are two polished epistropheal vertebrae with cut marks associated with post-mortem decapitation, indicative of processing for handling or curating (Fig. 4).

Confirmation of the artificial origin of the cut marks is presented in Fig. 5.

SECTION

Non-human agents: root mark grooves, chewing and puncture marks, QBI

PARAGRAPH

Root mark grooves were found on 120 bones in the EBA group.

Gnawing was identified on 98 bone fragments, likely from carnivores such as wolves, dogs and foxes.

The carnivores also left pits and punctures on one ilium (Fig. 6) and on the ends of several long bones.

Cortical surfaces of the bones from both groups were sound in almost all cases.

In LBA/EIA group, gnawing was missing and root mark grooves occurred sporadically.

The average QBI was 83.4% in the EBA group (n = 10; SD 20%) and 94.5% in LBA/EIA (n = 13; SD 10%), meaning no group was subject to long-lasting weathering.

SECTION

Correlation between the practice of excarnation and culture

PARAGRAPH

Based on our data analysis, including culture/dating (EBA and LBA/EIA), across the 14 variables used, there is a strong statistical correlation between the practice of excarnation and culture (Fig. 7).

There is no connection between age, sex or site.

The use of K-means clustering was useful in identifying which variable was most representative in each culture, and if any pits deviated from the rest and why.

The variables which were shown to cluster into each cultural group were: individuals per pit; state of articulation; cut and chop marks; perimortem fractures; polishing; and the presence of gnawing (Table 3).

Other variables were more or less associated with one of the cultural groups but not significantly so.

LBA/EIA burials were characterized by variables associated with active hand excarnation.

EBA burials were characterized by variables associated with other possible practices of excarnation (prior burial or exposure).

PARAGRAPH

Fig. 7 shows individuals clustered in the two culture groups also illustrates standardized values with 0 (average) and SD 1 (−1).

Variables around 0 do not influence clustering in two groups.

The greater their positive or negative value, the greater their influence on clustering.

For example, the value 1.21 in cut marks means that the average of the observed variable in given cluster is 1.21 times that of SD above the overall average.

Around the zero point, API and QBI are concentrated as they are similar between the two groups, with no effect on clustering.

In the EBA group, a higher concentration at zero shows less distinctive variables and their minor influence on clustering, than those found in LBA/EIA.

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

The balance of evidence supports the idea that excarnation practices differed between EBA and LBA/EIA.

Excarnation in EBA was likely the result of natural agents.

Bodies might have been exposed to scavenging or buried in primary grave.

This is supported by the presence of gnawing, root mark grooves, semi-articulation, absence of charring, tool marks and polishing.

LBA/EIA excarnations were different.

Bones were defleshed postmortem and some curated for long periods.

Excarnation with tools is evidenced by tool marks on the bones, charring, polishing, and absence of any trace of non-human agents.

Bodies were not exposed on the surface or buried in a primary grave.

PARAGRAPH

There is increasing evidence that burial traditions in the Bronze and Iron Age are more varied than is often acknowledged.

Although secondary burials in the Moravian Bronze and Iron Age are a relatively frequent finding (Fig. 1), almost nothing is known about their origin, and the practice of excarnation.

Only well-known sites like Cezava near Blučina, Hradisko near Kroměříž, Tabulová hora near Mikulov, and Skalka near Velim in Bohemia have been investigated in detail, and findings remain inconclusive.

In Cezava near Blučina, (Salaš, 1990) interprets some Late Bronze Age human remains as victims of violence, whereas similar contexts from EBA are considered to be special mortuary treatment.

Smrčka et al. (1988) explains one EBA settlement pit from Cezava near Blučina as possible evidence of cannibalism.

Skeletal remains from Skalka near Velim in Bohemia are interpreted, after revision by (Outram et al., 2005), as victims of violence.

Human remains deposited in the hillfort Hradisko near Kroměříž are interpreted as an irregular burial event devoid of ritual (Jelínek, 1954; Spurný, 1954).

With the exception of Cezava near Blučina (Jelínek, 1993, 1994), studies of bone mutilation and taphonomic modification are extremely rare in Moravian archaeology.

Cezava near Blučina contains skeletal remains dating from the Early and Late Bronze Age (Salaš, 1990).

Skeletons from the Late Bronze Age bear numerous traces of body processing and they are interpreted as a result of ritual practices (Jelínek, 1994).

Other studies by (Jelínek, 1990) present mutilated skeletons from late EBA context.

He describes several cut marks and heat modification on articulated and semi-articulated skeletons interred in settlement pits.

The same skeletal elements also show traces of gnawing.

Cut marks were identified on the sternal ends of ribs on their external side, on one clavicle, ilium, lumbar vertebrae and so on.

Jelínek (1990) interpreted these findings as a result of thoracic and abdominal evisceration, however, he does not exclude violence as he also found a flint blade in one context.

In the Knovíz culture (The Tumulus culture to the Knovíz horizon) of the Late Bronze Age (1300–920 BCE) in Bohemia (western Czech Republic) human remains were often discovered in unusual situations (Jiráň, 2008).

Remains are frequently found as semi-articulated or disarticulated fragments in settlement storage pits with artificial bone modification.

Skeletal modifications support the finding of manual excarnation with tools in secondary mortuary treatment.

The Knovíz findings in Bohemia support a greater occurrence and expansion of excarnation with tools in the wider region (Koutecký, 1990).

PARAGRAPH

Secondary manipulation of human remains in the EBA is found also in formal cemeteries across Central Europe (Aspöck, 2018; Melis, 2017; Neugebauer and Neugebauer-Maresch, 1997; Sosna et al., 2011).

Graves in cemeteries were usually reopened after primary burial.

Reopening of graves and manipulation with remains and grave goods is interpreted as a cultural practice, a multi-stage mortuary rite, including temporary deposition in a primary grave with consequent post-funerary activities (Sosna et al., 2011).

There is some evidence for bone removal or damage caused by the reopening of graves (Melis, 2017).

Melis (2017) investigated missing body parts from Bronze Age cemeteries in Hungary.

According to her, skulls were removed most frequently from graves whereas no missing hand or foot bones were recorded.

These findings can explain the overrepresentation of skull bones and underrepresentation of hand and foot bones in secondary contexts.

Secondary bone deposits in settlement pits may be those which were removed from formal cemeteries.

However, more detailed investigations are needed to assess EBA secondary manipulation.

PARAGRAPH

During the Middle and Late Bronze Age, shifts in individual and local community identities were expressed through mortuary rituals in Central Europe.

Primary and secondary mortuary rituals involved widespread transition from relatively individual practice to community-based rituals with strong communal ancestor worship.

As with cremation so manual excarnation, as a multistage practice, require scheduling of funeral events and are both linked with the season of various festivals (Hertz, 1960; Metcalf, 1981).

Fests could have served to integrate a community and lessen socioeconomic and kin-groups differences during social and political changes.

Bone curating and eventually cashing could have also been understood as collective shared past and identity during the destabilizing period of Late Bronze Age (Kaniewski and Van Campo, 2017).

Other explanations of the practice of manual excarnation are changing settlement practices (Hershkovitz and Gopher, 1990).

Individuals deceased far away from their community were defleshed as fast as possible and brought back for burial.

Other non-negligible reasons of the practice of manual excarnation could be practical issues or environmental conditions.

Individuals who could not be cremated were manually defleshed (Kuijt, 1996).

Fear of death may have also played a significant role (Metcalf and Huntington, 1997).

Universally, it has been posited that dead body is perceived with some degree of fear and, in the majority of cultures, as having the potential to intrude supernaturally upon the living, most often in a negative sense (Metcalf and Huntington, 1997).

Dividing and sharing a dead body may have prevented the corpse from coming back to life (Bendann, 1930).

PARAGRAPH

Secondary mortuary manipulation prolongs ritual ceremony, and is often practiced by societies in which kinship is the principal means of social organization (Schroeder, 2001).

Death is a social event, the starting point of a ceremonial process whereby the dead person becomes an ancestor (Hertz, 1960).

According to (Hertz, 1960) the processing of the dead body represents the steps of this passage, particularly from “wet” to “dry”.

The first step is soft tissue decomposition or manual defleshing.

This process weakens the dead's relationship with the living, the bonds to his/her social status, and the role he/she held throughout his/her life.

Survivors and relatives are saddened during this time.

Hertz (1960) believes that grief parallels decomposition.

When this period ends, dry bones are exhumed and the deceased has a new identity.

Secondary mortuary practices separate the deceased from his or her social connections.

Secondary mortuary practice is a long-standing practice evident also in much later Judeo-Christian traditions.

Around the beginning of Common Era, Jews gathered dry bones and put them in jars and later in graves (Davies, 2008).

The Christian tradition of ossuaries represents a two-stage transformation of the identity of the deceased, from their separation from living society into valued ancestor (Hertz, 1960).

Davies (2008) describes the custom from Orthodox Greece, where secondary mortuary practice was frequent.

The state of decomposition after exhumation was used to separate saint from sinner.

Bodies were reburied to wait for complete decomposition of the soft tissues.

Circumstances of death also require pragmatic consideration (Metcalf, 1981) and secondary mortuary practice may reflect, for example, the period necessary to obtain funds for a proper funeral.

Sosna (2007) used HRAF files to investigate 87 societies for the analysis of their secondary mortuary practices.

He found this practice in 20 cases of the total sample.

The main reason for practicing secondary mortuary practice was the social status of the dead, and the dominant practice of flesh removal was excarnation by prior burial.

Primary and secondary places of burial were always different in his dataset.

He also encountered the frequent habit of choosing a specific bone, such as a skull or jaw, to represent prestige or use as a medium for communication with the ancestors.

Similar conclusions were also reached by (Schroeder, 2001).

PARAGRAPH

The current research has some limitations.

Major sources of unreliability include: 1) uncertain causes of bone marks, 2) recognizing secondary burials, 3) small sample size and statistical significance.

Some taphonomical traces are not exclusive to a particular context and do not represent unambiguous evidence of excarnation.

For example, root mark grooves which are more often associated with burials interred in primary graves can also occur in bones that were modified in other ways (McKinley, 2008).

Plants obtain minerals from skeletal remains, roots infiltrate bone spaces, secrete acids and etch bone surfaces.

This can happen in primary and/or secondary graves.

Weathering and gnawing marks are usually associated with secondary excarnation by exposure, but may be related to primary burial excarnation prior to secondary mortuary rituals (McKinley, 2008) or occurred at any point in the taphonomic history (Booth and Madgwick, 2016).

Animal activity may also damage bones in shallow graves (Knüsel and Robb, 2016).

Conversely, bones without traces of scavenging cannot be a priori interpreted as evidence of primary burial (Dominguez-Solera and Dominguez-Rodrigo, 2011; Haynes, 1980).

A second limitation is the risk of confusion of secondary burials with random post-depositional processes.

A strict definition of secondary burials is difficult (Moutafi and Voutsaki, 2016).

Some authors (Harrisson, 1967; McKenzie, 1965) define secondary burials as a practice characterized by the collection of skeletonized remains arranged according to certain pattern.

Secondary depositions are also often defined by skeletal part representation (Knüsel and Robb, 2016; Sprague, 2005).

Bone representativeness itself, i.e. the absence of small bones, may not be a clear indication of secondary burials (Robb, 2016).

There is also confusion interpreting bone arrangement.

Bones that appear to be dispersed in a pit may have been arranged and then scattered by natural or human post-depositional processes.

A third limit to this study is the current sample size and statistical significance.

The low number of interpretable skeletal remains, results from the destruction, unavailability or poor records of the osteological remains of past field research.

Skeletal material from settlement context excavated in the past is often poorly reported, subjectively interpreted, confused with residual bones, or simply ignored.

Skeletal material is often unavailable, has no documentation, and no known context.

It is therefore hard to assemble a large number of “reliable” skeletons.

It is critically important that future research in this area involve the same specialists in both the field and laboratory examination of any set of skeletal remains, operating with clear research goals, proper tools and the funds necessary for appropriate reporting and storage.

PARAGRAPH

The analysis presented in this paper is only a small step toward a better understanding of diachronic change in secondary mortuary treatment.

The strength of this contribution lies in its new approach to studying patterns of variation and temporal change in the structure of secondary burials during the Bronze and Iron Age in Central Europe.

My investigation in this area is ongoing and likely to confirm the results presented in this study.

SECTION

Conclusion

PARAGRAPH

The transition from inhumation to cremation, two primary forms of burial during Central European Bronze Age, was accompanied by changes in secondary mortuary rite.

These changes included different kinds of excarnation.

Whereas EBA secondary burials are characterized by passive excarnation, i.e. exposure to carnivores and excarnation by primary burial, during LBA/EIA, secondary burials comprise of excarnation with tools and bone curating.

Cremation and active manual excarnation of unburnt bodies could both have aimed for a rapid acquisition of clean bone fragments for cashing.

Bone cashing and curating are characteristic for institutionalized and stratified societies with strong kinship bonds.

Similarly, the different methods of manual excarnation and the practice of cremation both require the involvement of a larger community.

In such a community, the curated artifacts made of human bones may have served as symbols of ancestry, lineage or community.

From this aspect, the changes in excarnation methods during Central European Late Bronze and Early Iron Age, in relation to the contemporaneous cremation practice, represent growing emphasis upon stronger community cohesion.

PARAGRAPH

Burial is a highly symbolic activity through which concepts of the world are reflected in the representation and treatment of human remains.

Mortuary rituals involve different body transformations but in general comprise soft tissue decomposition and skeletonization.

The meaning and importance of these findings is that Central European Bronze Age is a period of substantial mortuary variability and focusing only on the primary mortuary rite at formal cemeteries excludes a significant portion of the entire mortuary ritual.

Any interpretation of past ritual practices that overlooks temporal patterns in ritual rite is incomplete.

This study provides new insights in the diachronic trends of secondary burial and takes a step toward a more methodological approach to studying and interpreting excarnation practices.

Ritual activities after death and excarnation practices are not only a complicated technological process but also organizationally and socially challenging events requiring strategic planning skills.

The changing patterns in secondary burials are therefore reflective of a significant social transformation that parallels the transition from inhumation to cremation in the Bronze Age.