10.1016/j.jasrep.2018.11.012

FULLTEXT

TITLE

A preliminary survey on hand grip and hand-tool morphometrics in three different stone tools

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Primates have a particular ability in object manipulation when compared with other mammals.

Although there is evidence of object-assisted behaviors in many primate species (Goodall, 1964; Van Lawick-Goodall, 1971; Luncz et al., 2016), only humans evolved a specialized tool-dependant culture (Plummer, 2004).

The importance of the human-tool relationship is the main reason why technology is studied in many different fields ranging from biomechanics to rehabilitation medicine or paleoanthropology.

PARAGRAPH

Tools that we use in everyday life have a design that conforms to their specific use.

These functional features are perceived by our brain and channel our behavioral response so as to interact with the object.

This process is strictly related with the concept of affordance.

This term was defined by James J. Gibson in 1979, who stated that “affordances of the environment are what it offers the animal, what it provides or furnishes, either for good or ill.

The verb to afford is found in the dictionary, but the noun affordance is not.

I have made it up.

I mean by it something that refers to both the environment and the animal in a way that no existing term does.

It implies the complementarity of the animal and the environment” (Gibson, 1979).

PARAGRAPH

The notion of affordance has acquired a multitude of meanings since then.

Turvey and Carello (2011) define affordance as the behavioral possibilities of an object, while for others, affordances are those properties of an object that indicate how to interact with it (Borghi, 2007).

The interaction with an object is based on previous personal experience.

Other authors (Osiurak et al., 2017) conclude that “an affordance is an animal-relative, biomechanical property specifying an action possibility within a body/hand-centered frame of reference.

Affordances correspond to a description of this possibility at a physical, but not at a neurocognitive level”.

PARAGRAPH

The concept of tool is something associated to its effectiveness.

Its use influences (and generally enhances) the behavioral capacity of the subject (Wagman and Carello, 2001).

Following the principles of the Techno-Functional approach, tools are structurally linked to the user and the physical properties of tools condition how these tools are used (Boëda, 2013: 46).

A tool can be seen as a prolongation of the limbs, directly connected to the hand and to the body, modifying the capacity of the individual for perceiving and acting.

This tight connection effectively changes the boundary between the organism and the environment and extends effectiveness to accomplish a given target or functional requirement (Wagman and Carello, 2001).

If there is no physical contact between the tool and the body, the tool is perceived as a part of the environment, and its specific affordances are limited to the visual information.

However, when a tool is handled, it is integrated in the neural scheme of the body as a terminal part of the limbs (Maravita and Iriki, 2004; Quallo et al., 2009).

Following this equivalence between body and tool, the tool is perceived as an extension of the body, or the body is perceived as a tool (Iriki and Sakura, 2008).

From the archaeological point of view, Leroi-Gourhan has already conceived the tool as a phenomenon of externalization of the body (Leroi-Gourhan, 1965: 41–42).

Therefore, it is no longer an external object, and it becomes a functional extension of the user, modifying the user's sensorimotor capacities (Osiurak et al., 2017).

Tool use particularly influences the structure and functions of the parietal lobes and tool training can be effective in this sense even in non-human primates (Quallo et al., 2009).

PARAGRAPH

In this process, the hand plays a crucial role.

Whether the human hand evolved as an adaptation to tool-use is a recurrent question in anthropology (Marzke and Marzke, 2000), and tool-dependency in our genus suggests a selective pressure on the morphology of the hand.

Unfortunately, morphological information on the hands of extinct human species is incredibly scanty (Bruner et al., 2016).

Neanderthals had probably more robust hands than modern humans (Niewoehner, 2001; Churchill, 2001; Patiño et al., 2017) but functional interpretations are, in this sense, still speculative.

Our hand is functionally adapted for tool manipulation and, vice versa, we produce ergonomic tools with features that optimize hand-tool interaction (Kadefors et al., 1993).

Historically, Napier (1960) proposed two basic ways in which our fingers can interact with an object: precision grip and power grip.

In the first case, the object is “pinched between the flexor aspects of the fingers and the opposing thumb”.

In the second case, objects are grasped mainly by the fingers, and they are actively stabilized in the palm.

Studies in hand biomechanics during simulated stone-tool use reveal a correlation between finger length and the force needed to stabilize the objects during the tool making (Rolian et al., 2011).

The relative proportion between thumb and radial fingers is important when generating high finger pressure (Rolian et al., 2011).

Besides proportions, there are of course more general aspects influencing the haptic experience.

For example, somatosensory perception in human hand depends on hand size, with tactile capacity increasing when fingertip size decreases (Peters et al., 2009).

PARAGRAPH

Most metric analyses in archaeology and experimental archaeology deal with measures of tools.

Morphometrics applied to stone tools have been traditionally used to analyze the morphological variation of different tool types in order to produce cultural categories and investigate their morphological evolution (e.g., Serwatka and Riede, 2016; Cardillo, 2010).

More recently, metric approaches have been also used to deal with technological and functional issues (Chacón et al., 2016 and references therein).

All these procedures have considered tools as independent and isolated elements, without taking in account the hand-tool functional system.

However, haptic dynamics and body cognition concern the physical integration of the two elements, the hand and the tool, and a morphological analysis of this functional unit is therefore necessary to investigate variations and discontinuities in the fossil record.

PARAGRAPH

The aim of this exploratory survey is to analyze hand-tool metrics according to the haptic interaction between a sample of adult individuals and three Paleolithic tools which represent distinct cultural and functional categories.

SECTION

Materials and methods

PARAGRAPH

In this study, we used three experimental stone tools, a cleaver, a handaxe and a convergent sidescraper with morphologies that fall into the typical variation of these tool types (Fig. 1a, b, c).

Diverse tool types were selected in order that find and consider differences between different morphologies.

Table 1 shows their main diameters, namely maximum length (ML), maximum width (MW), maximum thickness (MT) and the distance between the point of maximum thickness and the geometric centre (d).

We considered the position of the maximum thickness point and the position of the geometric centroid for each tool, as well as the distance between them.

The former was localized directly on the tool, by using a caliper, and the latter was calculated from the coordinates of thirty equally-spaced 2D-landmarks of the outline after photographing, through tps Dig 2.29 (Rohlf, 2009; Fig. 1d).

Subjects were 20 right-handed volunteers, (8 men and 12 women) between 15 and 64 years of age (mean age 28 ± 13.5).

The sample includes subjects with no previous knowledge in archaeology as well as students in prehistory.

Because of the limited sample size, at present we can't evaluate the statistical differences between these two groups.

All subjects gave informed written consent.

Subjects were asked to handle the tools until they reach a stable and comfortable position in order to quantify the grasping modality.

Subjects were blindfolded so as to limit the hand-tool interaction to haptic experience.

Accordingly, they were not allowed to see the tools before the experiment.

We also specified that the handling of the object must be based on tactile perception only, without taking into account any possible specific functional task of the tool.

The stone tools were positioned sequentially next to the subject hand before manipulation.

Once a subject affirmed to have reached a comfortable position, hand-tool distances were measured with a caliper (see below), and a photograph was taken for subsequent assessment of the grasping pattern.

PARAGRAPH

We classified the grasping modalities following the classification based on Feix et al. (2009) (Fig. 2):

Power grip with the thumb opposite to the remaining fingers.

The object is grasped with the palm only.

Power grip like the previous one, but in this case the thumb is positioned in the direction of the tool, adding further stability.

Precision grip through the tips of index finger and thumb.

It is usually used to handle small objects.

Precision grip by using more fingers, opposite to the thumb.

Intermediate position between power and precision grip.

The object is located between thumb and the rest of the fingers and supported by the palm.

In this case, firmness and grip are combined with precision.

PARAGRAPH

We measured the following hand-tool distances (Fig. 3b): the distance from the wrist's center to the point of maximum thickness of the stone tool (WMT), the distance from the center of the wrist to the centroid of the stone tool (WCE - modified from Wagman and Carello, 2003), and the distance between the thumb and the little finger (TLF - Borel et al., 2016).

We also measured some basic diameters of the hand, namely maximum length (ML) and palmar width (PW), and computed the average of these two variables as general hand size index (HS) (Fig. 3a).

PARAGRAPH

For each tool, we calculated the descriptive statistics for the hand-tool metrics in terms of absolute values and adjusted for maximum hand length and maximum tool length.

We also calculated the correlation between hand dimensions and hand-tool variables.

The prevalence of each grasping modality was calculated for each tool.

The Kruskal-Wallis test was used to compare hand-tool metrics in the three tools.

Pearson's correlation and Analysis of Covariance were used to test relationships.

Although the sample size is small, we also computed a preliminary Mann-Whitney comparison for males and females.

Statistics were computed with past 3.20 (Hammer et al., 2001) and statistica13.

Results are considered significant for p < 0.05.

SECTION

Results

PARAGRAPH

Table 2 shows the mean values for hand metrics in males and females.

Fig. 4 shows the percentage of grasp modality for each tool.

The cleaver is grasped equally with the two power grips (types A and B), while with the handaxe, power grip B (with the thumb in line with the other fingers) is prevalent.

Convergent sidescrapers are mainly grasped with a 3-finger precision grip (type D), and sometimes supported by the palm (type E).

PARAGRAPH

Table 3 and Fig. 5 show the distribution of hand-tool metrics for each tool.

The distance between the centroid and thickest point is larger for the cleaver and smaller for the handaxe.

The distances from the wrist to the center (WCE) and to the point of maximum thickness (WMT) are the same in the three cases, and both increase as the tool size decreases.

The distance between thumb and little finger (TLF) displays the opposite trend, increasing as the tool size increases.

As a consequence of this inverse relationship, in the cleaver, the three variables show similar values (p = 0.38), while in the sidescraper, the thumb-little finger distance is definitely smaller than the other two (p < 0.0001).

The handaxe displays an intermediate figure, and the difference is also significant (p = 0.0002).

The handaxe shows the largest degree of variation and the sidescraper the least.

PARAGRAPH

Fig. 6 shows the median values for the three tools adjusted for tool and hand length.

As evidenced from the distributions for each tool (Fig. 6), longitudinal distances (WMT, WCE) slightly increase in smaller tools (Sidescraper > Handaxe > Cleaver), while hand aperture (TLF) strongly decreases with smaller tools (Sidescraper < Handaxe < Cleaver).

Adjusting for hand dimension (Table 4), this means that the former increase from roughly 55% of the hand length, to roughly 65% of the hand length, while the latter decrease from 50% to <40%.

Adjusting for tool length, all three variables increase from the larger cleaver to the smaller sidescraper, although the cleaver and the handaxe show similar figures.

In the cleaver, all distances represent roughly 65% of the tool length.

The increase in the sidescraper is much larger for the longitudinal distances, reaching 200% of the tool length.

PARAGRAPH

WCE and WMT are correlated (p < 0.01), although much more in the handaxe (R = 0.99) than in the cleaver (R = 0.62), with the sidescraper showing an intermediate value (R = 0.83).

An analysis of covariance (Fig. 7) shows that the relationships for these two variables in the three tools are different (p < 0.005 for both slopes and intercepts).

TLF is not correlated with the other two metrics.

PARAGRAPH

Table 5 shows the correlations between hand dimensions and hand-tool metrics.

For the cleaver, there is no correlation between hand size and hand-tool distances, while for the handaxe, there is a correlation between hand dimensions and palmar aperture.

For the sidescraper, most hand-tool variables are correlated with hand dimensions.

In this case, a mean determination coefficient computed for all variable is R2 = 0.32.

PARAGRAPH

Significant sex differences can be found only for the sidescraper, with males showing larger hand-tool distances for all absolute and relative metrics (p < 0.03) except for the distance wrist-centroid (WCE).

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

In this preliminary analysis, we considered the spatial distances between hand and object for three representative Paleolithic tools.

Many studies in prehistoric archaeology consider tool morphometric (Shott and Trail, 2010; Lycett et al., 2010; Iovita and McPherron, 2011; Lycett and von Cramon-Taubadel, 2013; Herzlinger et al., 2017).

However, hand-tool relationships are crucial to both ergonomic and cognitive functions (Maravita and Iriki, 2004; Tunik et al., 2007; Iriki and Sakura, 2008), and can be investigated in terms of spatial variation.

The use of technology involves aspects associated with tool-function relationships, and with hand-tool relationships.

In this survey, we have investigated this latter issue, in terms of metrics.

In this case, a proper statistical approach (group differences, correlations, functional thresholds etc.) should be based on the hand-tool complex.

The purpose of this survey was therefore to quantify the hand-tool distances in a sample of adult individuals when handling three typical stone tools.

It is worth noting that this study is aimed at evaluating patterns and variation of tool spontaneous handling in modern humans, according to different tool typologies.

The main target of this approach is to allow evaluating the influence of tool properties on the haptic experience in our species.

Indirectly, it can also provide some information on general trends on cognitive evolution in extinct hominids, because of the taxonomic proximity.

Nonetheless, in this latter case the evidence can only be extrapolated, and any further conclusion requires additional complementary archaeological data.

PARAGRAPH

When vision supports grasping, the hand is already in an established shape and position when reaching the object (Santello et al., 2002; Jarque-Bou et al., 2016).

However, in our survey, individuals were blindfolded and the hand underwent a tactile performance to explore the geometrical and physical properties of the tool.

Body cognition is rooted in haptic experience, which is a sensorial process associated with the dynamic responses after tool grasping and, accordingly, to changes of the body arrangement (Turvey and Carello, 2011).

Such prosthetic association between body and tool is not strictly related to tool function which, apart from the haptic response, involves a further cognitive component associated with planning and executive functions.

In this survey, we have focused on the analysis of the haptic relationships and, accordingly, handling has been limited to the sensorial exchange between hand and tool.

Hence, our hand-tool metrics is referred to a comfort position between hand and stone, and not to a functional target, dealing hence more with ergonomics than with tasks.

It is worth noting that there is no direct evidence for hafting large handaxes or cleavers, although hafted use has been proposed for cleavers (Claud et al., 2015).

Hafting evidence is more robust for Middle Paleolithic, flakes and sidescrapers (Rots, 2009; 2013; Pawlik and Thissen, 2011; Cârciumaru et al., 2012).

Nonetheless, hand prehension might have been a better and faster mode to manipulate stone tools like sidescrapers (Baena-Preysler et al., 2016).

Therefore, these tools were probably employed directly through hand contact, and are hence particularly interesting for investigating hand-tool ergonomics in prehistory.

PARAGRAPH

As is to be expected, males have larger hands than females.

Therefore, allometric effects are supposed to have a relevant role in sexual differences, which are largely consequences of size-related variations.

Hand size is inversely proportional to the density of tactile receptors and their sensitivity (Peters et al., 2009).

Due to the distribution of the mechanoreceptors, tactile perception increases in smaller finger-tip areas where they are packed more densely.

In the human hand, tactile sensitivity varies across the skin, where the forehead and palm show increased acuity (Ackerley et al., 2014).

Cutaneous mechanoreceptive afferents innervating the finger-pad also play major roles in the first phase of object-size perception (Berryman et al., 2006).

In adult humans, the main hand differences (including sexual ones) are due to size variation, although the palm/finger ratio should also be taken into account (Bruner et al., 2018).

Beside hand size, also object volume affects grasping typology (Pouydebat et al., 2009).

Therefore, both hand and tool size should be taken in account in haptic studies, because they influence perception and interaction during handling.

PARAGRAPH

The cleaver is handled with a power grip.

The hand shape influences the force distribution at the hand surface and the muscle forces during maximal power-grip tasks (Rossi et al., 2014).

The influence of the handle dimensions during cylindrical grip is important because its impacts on the maximal grip force, on the force distribution on the hand surface and on the muscle forces (Kong and Lowe, 2005; Aldien et al., 2005).

When handling the cleaver, hand-tool distance and hand aperture display comparable values (≈65% of the tool length).

In this case, hand size is not correlated with hand-tool distances.

Therefore, the hand-tool spatial relationships are not influenced by hand size.

PARAGRAPH

Like the cleaver, the handaxe used in this study is handled with a power grip, although with a different involvement of the thumb, aligned with the tool.

Hand-tool distances are somehow intermediate between cleaver and sidescraper, although with figures closer to the former.

Wrist-tool length and hand aperture increase, when compared to the cleaver.

In the handaxe, hand-tool distances are more variable than in the other two tools, suggesting individual idiosyncratic differences during grasping.

Palmar aperture increases in larger hands, though hand aperture depends on palmar width but also on thumb proportions (Williams et al., 2012, Hu et al., 2018).

Therefore, it is likely that the correlation between hand size and palmar aperture in handaxes is due to a different involvement of the thumb, when compared with cleavers.

Tool size has also a probable effect in this sense, because smaller handaxes are easier to manipulate than larger ones (Galán and Domínguez-Rodrigo, 2014).

PARAGRAPH

The sidescraper is generally handled with a three-finger precision grip, although there is frequently integration between the fingers and palm.

A two-finger precision grip is generally not employed in any of these tools.

Concerning hand-tool measures, the sidescraper shows the opposite pattern when compared with the other tools, displaying longer hand-tool distances and narrower palmar aperture.

The sidescraper shows the least variation in hand-tool metrics, evidencing limited intra-individual differences in grasping proportions.

Most variables are correlated with hand size, suggesting that grasping is influenced by hand dimensions, which accounts for 32% of the hand-tool distances.

Nonetheless, although the relationship between hand and tool size is crucial for grasping (Seo and Armstrong, 2008), our results suggest that it explains only a part of the behavioral response.

Other factors (shape, weight, or tactile response) have relevant importance.

In fact, object perception is influenced by object compliance; higher curvatures in tools produce higher stresses and strains at receptor sites, without increase in contact force (Berryman et al., 2006).

In general, during object manipulation, a greater contact area can reduce the pressure of the force on the hand and it may enhance comfort in object manipulation (Fransson-Hall and Kilbom, 1993).

In addition, a greater contact area means a greater skin surface in contact with an object.

This is associated with higher friction coefficients that prevent objects from sliding out of the hand (Seo and Armstrong, 2008).

PARAGRAPH

A relevant issue concerns a basic difference between broadly representative technology of Lower and Middle Paleolithic in the elements involved in grasping (Stout et al., 2015).

Namely, in larger objects, the whole hand is involved in grasping (palm and fingers) while in small objects just the fingers or fingertips are engaged in the haptic process.

Because of the different kind of sensorial toolkit involved (Schlereth et al., 2001; Pérez-González et al., 2013), in future analyses these two groups should be considered separately.

PARAGRAPH

The distance between maximum thickness of the tool and centroid of the tool merits a further note.

The former represents a relevant structural reference, while the latter represents a geometrical reference.

Constancy in the position of the point of maximum thickness is interpreted as constancy in grasping (Grosman, 2016).

Their respective distances from the wrist are correlated in this study.

However, the degree and pattern of this correlation is very different between different tools.

Hence, this result suggests that centroid and thickness can supply distinct information when considering the handling of different stone tool typologies, and must be evaluated independently.

PARAGRAPH

In this study, we found sexual differences only when handling the sidescraper, which is actually the only tool displaying a patent influence of hand size.

Nonetheless, these differences can be confirmed also when adjusting the values for the hand length, suggesting possible differences in grasping due to behavioral factors.

However, because of the sample size of this preliminary analysis, this result must be intended as provisional.

SECTION

Conclusion

PARAGRAPH

This survey represents a preliminary study on the hand-tool spatial relationships in prehistoric archaeology, introducing hand-tool metrics that can be easily measured and compared in archaeological context.

The aim was to evaluate the patterns and degree of variation of the hand-tool spatial organization on the base of a purely haptic experience.

Such information is necessary to design future and more specific analyses of the hand-tool structural association along human evolution.

Biomechanical issues (including hand and tool morphology or physical properties) can be analyzed so as to investigate the biocultural co-evolution between body and technology.

Furthermore, this same information may be also directly involved in cognitive aspects, when considering that recent theories suggest that the cognitive processes could be due to integration between brain, body and tools (Malafouris, 2010, 2013; Bruner and Iriki, 2016).

In this case, the study of the spatial management of the hand-tool system may provide information on basic cognitive features associated with technological prosthetic extension.

PARAGRAPH

These preliminary results show that each tool is associated with different hand-tool proportions during the haptic experience.

The handaxe were generally intermediate between the cleaver and the sidescraper, although its size is definitely comparable with the cleaver.

Grasping is influenced only in part by hand dimensions in the sidescraper, which is the only tool that shows sexual differences.

Because grasping in large and small tools involves different anatomical elements (hand-fingers-tips), the haptic experience can be based on distinct factors, which should be analyzed separately.

Future analyses on larger samples will aim to evaluate patterns of variation within and between tool groups belonging to distinct chronological periods and to different prehistoric cultures.

The contribution of different cognitive aspects (vision, touch, use and purpose) should be also considered through the use of more comprehensive experimental paradigms.