10.1016/j.jasrep.2018.11.003

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Comprehensive magnetic surveys of kilns for bell and tile fabrication in Castile (Spain)

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

During the last years, the archaeomagnetic research has experienced a great development.

The improvement of archaeomagnetism as a dating method as well as our knowledge of the Earth's magnetic field variations in direction and intensity for the last millennia mainly depends on our ability to obtain high-quality data from a wide suite of geological or archaeological records.

With regard to archaeological remains, burnt materials such as kilns, baked clays or hearths are particularly suitable to this aim.

They usually have independent dating information, are generally well preserved and reached high temperatures (>600 °C) in the past, potentially carrying a thermoremanence or TRM.

Consequently, multiple secular variation (SV) curves have been published in different countries or regions worldwide.

It is worth mentioning, for instance, the American southwest (e.g.: Goguitchaichvili et al., 2018; Hagstrum and Blinman, 2010; Lengyel, 2010), the Near East (e.g.: Stillinger et al., 2015) and mostly Europe covering the last 2–3 millennia (e.g.: Gómez-Paccard et al., 2006; Schnepp and Lanos, 2005; Tema et al., 2006; Gallet et al., 2002; Hervè et al., 2013; Batt et al., 2017), and occasionally even older chronologies (e.g.: Palencia-Ortas et al., 2017; Kapper et al., 2014; Carrancho et al., 2013; Tema and Kondopoulou, 2011).

PARAGRAPH

Along with these regional SV curves, the design of high-quality geomagnetic field models (e.g.: Korte et al., 2009; Pavón-Carrasco et al., 2009, 2014) represents a step forward in the development of the archaeomagnetic dating method.

By “high-quality” we mean models composed exclusively of TRM data, which is by far the most efficient magnetization mechanism in nature.

Provided that the material remains physically in situ, it may preserve a very stable and snapshot signal of the Earth's magnetic field direction at the time of last cooling.

The intensity, however, does not necessary requires the material to be in situ.

If the age of these data is known by other techniques, they can be used to construct regional PSV curves or implement geomagnetic field models, which are already being used as dating tools of fired materials in archaeology (e.g.: Carrancho et al., 2017; Casas et al., 2014; Tema et al., 2013).

For that reason the latest archaeomagnetic studies are aiming to improve, update and temporarily extend these records thus expanding the potential of archaeomagnetism as a dating method (e.g.: Batt et al., 2017; Palencia-Ortas et al., 2017; Osete et al., 2016).

PARAGRAPH

Obtaining new full geomagnetic vector (direction and intensity) TRM data is interesting from the geophysical and archaeological point of view.

By improving the existing geomagnetic datasets adding new data (e.g.: Brown et al., 2015), the geophysicists get a deeper knowledge of the ancient Earth's magnetic field variations.

The interesting fact from the archaeological perspective is that the more data these PSV curves and geomagnetic models collate, the greater the precision of the method might be.

Furthermore, determining the last use of a combustion structure with accuracies comparable to radiocarbon (cf. few decades), has a clear archaeological interest.

The Iberian Peninsula is a good example of it and many archaeomagnetic studies have been carried out here over last years (e.g.: Carrancho et al., 2016, 2017; Casas et al., 2014; Prevosti et al., 2013; Catanzariti et al., 2012).

Here we report an archaeomagnetic study of two kilns discovered in 2012 during the rescue excavation of a medieval monastery in Cevico Navero (Palencia, Spain).

The structures were in situ and showed signs of being very well burned but no independent (absolute) chronological information was available about their last use.

Therefore, the main goal of this study is to date their last use with archaeomagnetism.

SECTION

Material and methods

SECTION

Studied materials

PARAGRAPH

The monastery of San Pelayo del Cerrato (41° 52′ 27″ N Lat., 4° 09′ 54″ W Long) is located two kilometers from the village of Cevico Navero, in the southeast of Palencia, Spain (Fig. 1).

Its history started in 934 CE, when the count Oveco Díaz and his wife Gutina donated to the abbot Pedro and his religious community the place where they could build a monastery.

During a long time the monastery was one of the most successful in the Castilian region and it wasn't until the 17th century, when the community lost its possessions (Moratinos and Palomino, 2010).

The definitive decline of the monastery took place in the 19th century, when all the belongings were sold as a result of the governmental expropriation to the church in 1836 (Moratinos and Palomino, 2010).

This study focuses on two kilns discovered in 2012 during the rescue excavations carried out at the site.

One of the kilns was used for the manufacture of bells (Fig. 1a) and the other was used for the fabrication of floor tiles (Fig. 1b).

Both combustion structures appeared well-preserved (in situ) and showed signs of heating at high temperatures.

Therefore, they were considered suitable for an archaeomagnetic dating study.

SECTION

Sampling

PARAGRAPH

The sampling technique varied depending on the characteristics, degree of consistence and availability of material from each kiln.

The bells´ kiln (Fig. 1a) was sampled collecting two independent hand blocks and orienting them with a magnetic compass with the aid of Plaster of Paris to ensure the highest accuracy as possible.

Later, in the laboratory, every hand block was subsampled in order to obtain multiple cubic specimens (~10 cm3), taking special care of the orientation lines.

Additionally, a fragment of a tile was also collected for absolute archaeointensity analyses.

PARAGRAPH

The kiln for manufacturing floor tiles was sampled using a portable electrical drill with a water-cooled diamond bit, following the standard palaeomagnetic sampling procedure.

The in-situ azimuth and dip of the drilled cores (samples) were measured using a compass coupled to a core orienting device.

12 cylindrical samples were collected from different parts of the tiles´ kiln (Fig. 1b).

Each sample produced a single specimen except two samples that produced two, resulting in 14 individual specimens to analyze.

Two different tiles (unoriented) from this kiln were also studied for absolute archaeointensity analyses.

SECTION

Directional and rock-magnetic analyses

PARAGRAPH

The directional and rock-magnetic analyses were carried out at the laboratory of palaeomagnetism of Burgos University, Spain.

The natural remanent magnetization (NRM) was measured using a 2G SQUID magnetometer (noise level 5 × 10−12 Am2).

The magnetic susceptibility was measured at room temperature initially and after each step of thermal demagnetization with a KLY-4 susceptibility meter (AGICO; noise level 3 × 10−8 S.I).

The progressive demagnetization of NRM was done by stepwise alternating field (AF) and thermal demagnetization (TH).

After a pilot study that allowed us to select the most appropriate sequence of demagnetization, the AF demagnetization was carried out in 20 steps up to a maximum peak field of 100 mT, with the demagnetization unit of the 2G magnetometer.

Thermal demagnetization was performed in 16 steps up to a 600 °C using a TD48 – SC (ASC) thermal demagnetizer.

After every step of thermal demagnetization, the magnetic susceptibility was measured in order to assess mineralogical alterations induced by the heating.

The direction of the characteristic remanent magnetization (ChRM) of all specimens was determined though principal components analysis (Kirschvink, 1980), including at least eight steps of demagnetization using the Remasoft software (Chadima and Hrouda, 2006).

Mean directions for each kiln were computed following Fisher (1953) statistics including the precision parameter (k) and the semi-angle of confidence (α95).

PARAGRAPH

The magnetic properties of the studied materials were analyzed on selected samples from both kilns with a Variable Field Translation Balance (MM_VFTB).

The main goals were to identify the main magnetic carriers, their domain state and thermomagnetic stability.

These experiments comprised: progressive isothermal remanent magnetization acquisition curves (IRM), hysteresis loops (±1 T), backfield curves and thermomagnetic curves up to 700 °C in air.

All of them were carried out in bulk representative samples (~400 mg) from both kilns.

The Curie temperatures in thermomagnetic curves were determined with the two tangent method of Grommé et al. (1969).

PARAGRAPH

The saturation of the remanent magnetization (Mrs), the magnetization of saturation (Ms) and the coercive field (Bc) were obtained from the hysteresis cycles after correcting them by the paramagnetic fraction.

The remanent coercive field (Bcr) was determined through the backfield curves.

Plotting the biparametric ratio Mrs/Ms vs Bcr/Bc on the Day's diagram (Day et al., 1977; Dunlop, 2002), provided information concerning the dominant magnetic domains in the studied collection.

SECTION

Archaeointensity experiments

PARAGRAPH

Twenty four samples belonging to 4 fragments were preselected for Thellier double heating absolute intensity experiments because of their suitable rock-magnetic properties.

These fragments were further broken into at least 6 pieces and pressed into salt pellets to facilitate their treatment as standard samples.

The Thellier-Coe type experiments (Thellier and Thellier, 1959; Coe, 1967) were carried out using a MAGNETIC MEASUREMENTS LtD furnace.

Ten temperature steps were distributed from room temperature to 560 °C with reproducibility between two heating runs to the same nominal temperature normally better than 2 °C.

560 °C was selected as maximum temperature step because the rock-magnetic survey (Section 3.1) indicated that Ti-poor titanomagnetite (almost magnetite phase) was the main carrier and their unblocking temperature spectra usually range between 550 and 570 °C, when most important intensity drop is observed.

The laboratory field strength was set to (40.0 ± 0.06) μT.

Five control heatings (so-called partial thermoremanent magnetization or pTRM-checks) were performed after the third heating step throughout whole experiments.

The cooling rate dependence of TRM was performed here following a modified procedure described in Chauvin et al. (2000); see also Morales et al. (2007, 2009), using a slow cooling time of 6 h to 6 h30 from 560 °C to room temperature.

In order to overcome the remanence anisotropy correction procedure which involves at least 6 additional heatings at high temperatures and to avoid potential magneto-chemical alterations (Goguitchaichvili et al., 2011) each of the fragments was arbitrary marked with parallel arrows on its internal or external flattening plane to create a reference orientation.

Then each ceramic fragment was broken into “oriented” specimens of different sizes.

Six specimens with the same type of shape and volume (1 cm3) were chosen per fragment, and were then embedded in ultra-pure salt (NaCl) pellets compressed with a non-magnetic hydraulic press in order to treat them as standard palaeomagnetic cores.

SECTION

Results and discussion

SECTION

Magnetic properties

PARAGRAPH

The magnetic properties of 12 representative samples from both kilns were investigated (7 from the bells' kiln and 5 from the tiles' kiln).

IRM acquisition curves are almost saturated at maximum fields between 150 and 300 mT, suggesting that the remanence is dominated by low coercivity minerals such as magnetite and/or maghaemite (Fig. 2a–b).

Sample Tile 2_1 reaches saturation at higher fields (300–400 mT) indicating that it also contains a small high-coercivity fraction.

However, its magnetic properties are clearly dominated by ferrimagnetics.

The dominance of low coercivity minerals is also observed in the backfield curves with Bcr values mostly distributed between 14.71 and 30.78 mT (Table 1).

The contribution of the high coercivity fraction to the remanent magnetization does not exceed 5–10% in the best case, so it is not really significant.

PARAGRAPH

Fig. 3(a–d) illustrates some representative examples of thermomagnetic curves (magnetization vs. temperature) from both kilns.

The main magnetic carrier is Ti-poor titanomagnetite, with Curie temperatures estimated around 580 °C.

Occasionally, however, Curie temperatures of 590 °C have also been estimated, suggesting the presence of magnetite partially maghaemitized (Fig. 3d).

It is worth to mention that most of the heating and cooling cycles are highly reversible (Fig. 3a–b), perhaps less evident in the case of the tile's kiln samples (e.g.: Fig. 3d).

Nevertheless, no additional secondary magnetite is created after heating in the laboratory in any case.

PARAGRAPH

The hysteresis ratios vary between 0.26 < Mrs/Ms < 0.16 and 1.94 < Bcr/Bc < 3.21, suggesting that most of the samples have a pseudo-single domain (PSD) state in the Day plot (Fig. 4 and Table 1).

The comparison of these results with the mixing lines estimated by Dunlop (2002) for magnetite suggests that the samples from the tiles´ kiln have, in relative terms, a higher contribution of superparamagnetic (SP) grains than those from the bells' kiln, which are more clustered in the upper left-hand corner of the PSD area.

These exhibit lower Bcr/Bc values closer to the single-domain (SD) area, although they could also be interpreted as due to a mixture of single-domain (SD) and multi-domain (MD) grains (Dunlop, 2002).

SECTION

Archaeomagnetic directions

PARAGRAPH

The initial natural remanent magnetization (NRM0) intensities range between 1.47 × 10−5 and 1.99 × 10−3 Am2kg−1, whereas magnetic susceptibility values oscillate between 1.14 × 10−7 and 5.80 × 10−6 m3kg−1.

The values of the Koenigsberger ratio were calculated [Qn = NRM / (χH)] (Stacey, 1967) where χ is the magnetic susceptibility and H is the intensity of the Earth's local magnetic field.

This parameter (Qn ratio; Fig. 5) provides a first quick estimation about the efficiency of the magnetization mechanism recorded, based on the relationship between the induced and the remanent magnetization.

It is therefore a useful parameter in the characterization of burnt archaeological materials like those reported here.

Our Qn ratio values fluctuate between 3.1 and 16.4, indicating that the magnetization mechanism is most probably of thermal origin (TRM).

PARAGRAPH

The orthogonal NRM demagnetization diagrams obtained in both kilns are characterized by high intensities of magnetization, are magnetically stable and show reproducible directions.

Two different palaeomagnetic components can be distinguished.

Firstly, a secondary component of normal polarity most probably of viscous origin, between NRM and 15 mT in the AF demagnetization diagrams (Fig. 6a–b) and between NRM and 250–300 °C in the thermally demagnetized diagrams (Fig. 6c–d).

Secondly, the characteristic remanent magnetization (ChRM) direction was defined between 15–20 mT up to 100 mT in the AF demagnetized diagrams (Fig. 6a–b).

In the thermally demagnetized samples the ChRM direction was considered between 250–300 °C up to 580–600 °C (Fig. 6c–d).

It has systematically normal polarity with a direction very reproducible among samples from the same kiln (Fig. 6).

The intensity decay curves show that the samples are dominated by low coercivity minerals in accordance with the rock-magnetic results reported before (Section 3.1).

The only exception is sample H12 (Fig. 6b), with ̴ 20% of the NRM remaining after applying a maximum peak field of 100 mT, most probably due to the presence of antiferromagnetic haematite.

Anyway, the ChRM direction is perfectly defined and goes toward the origin of the diagram, being easily isolated.

PARAGRAPH

The directional results obtained from the two kilns studied are shown in Fig. 7(a–b) and 30 out of the 35 specimens analyzed were accepted for the calculation of the mean archaeomagnetic direction.

Five specimens were excluded because they broke during the demagnetization process or due to a multicomponent or unstable nature of the NRM.

The mean direction obtained for this kiln is: declination = 2.6°; inclination = 45.2°; alpha95 (α95) = 1.8°; k = 221.3 (Fig. 7a).

The mean archaeomagnetic direction of the tiles' kiln (Fig. 7b) was calculated from 13 specimens of 14 analyzed and is as follows: declination = 359.0°; inclination = 45.6°; α95 = 4.3°; k = 93.8.

The directional results obtained in both kilns are coherent and statically very acceptable, with α95 < 5° and a high precision parameter (k), indicating that they are well-defined and statistically robust.

SECTION

Archaeointensity results

PARAGRAPH

The acceptance criteria for individual palaeo or archaeointensity determinations are now becoming standardized (Paterson, 2011) and may be summarized as follows: 1) Directions of natural remanent magnetization (NRM) end-points at each step obtained from Thellier double heating experiments have to fall along a reasonably straight line, trending toward to the origin in the interval chosen for archaeointensity determination.

2) No significant deviation of NRM directions toward the applied field direction should be observed.

3) At least five aligned TRM-NRM points on the Arai plot must be used.

4) NRM fraction factor (f, Coe et al., 1978) ≥ 0.3.

This means that at least 30% of the initial NRM was used for archaeointensity determination.

5) A quality factor q (Coe et al., 1978) ≥ 4 (generally above 5), being q=f∗gβ; g, the gap factor (Coe et al., 1978) and β the relative standard error of the slope.

6) Archaeointensity results obtained from NRM-pTRM diagrams must not show an evident concave up shape, since in such cases remanence is probably associated with the presence of MD grains (Levi, 1977; Kosterov et al., 1998).

7) Positive pTRM checks, i.e., the deviation of ‘pTRM’ checks <15% comparing to original NRM-TRM step.

PARAGRAPH

Almost all 24 analyzed samples yielded technically acceptable results (Fig. 8a–b and Table 2).

For these samples, the NRM fraction f used for determination ranges between 0.45 and 0.96 and the quality factor q from 4.96 to 36.0, being generally >5.

In single cases, we accepted lower q values because the corresponding intensity was relatively close to the site mean value.

The negative pTRM checks and clear deviation of NRM end points on associated orthogonal vector plots, acted as critical elements to reject failed samples (Fig. 8c).

The cooling rate correction generally reduced the standard deviation of the mean intensities.

The fragment-mean archaeointensity values obtained in this study range from 48.5 ± 7.5 μT to 59.5 ± 5.8 μT.

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

Two well-defined mean directions and absolute intensity determinations of the Earth's magnetic field have been obtained in the studied kilns.

The archaeomagnetic dating procedure consists of the comparison of the direction and/or intensity mean values obtained with a regional secular variation curve or a geomagnetic field model for a given period at site coordinates.

In those chronological intervals where the geomagnetic parameters (declination, inclination and/or intensity) intersect the master curve or the geomagnetic model, different age intervals will be obtained.

The statistical combination of the probability density functions of these parameters suggests periods of the last kilns´ use.

In case of multiple chronological intervals, determining which one is the most plausible largely depends on the coherence with the archaeological context.

Archaeomagnetic dating requires having a minimum chronological control usually derived from the archaeological context as is the case here.

PARAGRAPH

The mean directions and archaeointensity values obtained in both kilns have been compared with the SCHA.DIF.14k geomagnetic model (Pavón-Carrasco et al., 2014) using the archaeo_dating software of Pavón-Carrasco et al. (2011).

We selected this model because it is exclusively based on archaeomagnetic and lava flow data (only TRM determinations excluding sedimentary data) and for the last 3 ky the model predictions agree with those given by the global archaeomagnetic model ARCH3k.1 (Korte et al., 2009) and the European archaeomagnetic model SCHA.DIF.3k (Pavón-Carrasco et al., 2009).

Basically, the SCHA.DIF.14k model includes the same information compiled by these younger archaeomagnetic models although updated with the most recent data, so it is perfectly suitable to carry out the dating.

Indeed, the dating results obtained using these archaeomagnetic models including also the Iberian SV curve (Gómez-Paccard et al., 2006) are almost identical to those obtained with the SCHA.DIF.14k model reported below.

Furthermore, using the archaeo_dating software has the advantage that avoids any eventual relocation error which has been proved to introduce significant errors (Casas and Incoronato, 2007).

PARAGRAPH

According to the probability density function, the last use of the bells´ kiln is estimated between 1301 and 1391 CE (Fig. 9), whereas for the tiles´ kiln is between 1295 and 1404 CE (Fig. 10), both at the 95% confidence level.

These results indicate that the last use of both structures was probably coeval or happened closely confined in time, during the 14th century.

More importantly, the archaeomagnetic dating obtained is archaeologically consistent since it is known that in the 16th century the monastic community lost most of its possessions (Moratinos and Palomino, 2010) providing a terminus post quem.

PARAGRAPH

The low inclination values recorded in the Iberian archaeomagnetic database at Late Middle Ages are particularly helpful to constrain the last use of these kilns.

During the last two millennia, inclination values like those obtained here are only recorded between the 12th and 15th centuries (Gómez-Paccard et al., 2006).

A similar archaeomagnetic dating study where the magnetic inclination is particularly helpful to refine the last use of a medieval limekiln in Spain has been recently reported by Carrancho et al. (2017).

Over the last decade, the archaeomagnetic dating method has certainly reached a significant maturity and degree of application at archaeological sites mainly of historical age.

It is also true, however, that the majority of these studies are only based on directional analyses without including absolute archaeointensity determinations.

These are more uncommon among other reasons for methodological issues.

The materials must fulfill strict requirements such as carry a full TRM, do not alter their mineralogy upon laboratory heating and preferably hold a single-domain (SD) grain size (for details, see Tauxe, 2010).

PARAGRAPH

The knowledge of the full-vector of the geomagnetic field usually helps constraining the age in archaeomagnetic dating studies, but unfortunately not in our case.

The mean intensity values obtained for both kilns and their associated errors do not allow to further restrict the temporal interval determined only by the directional data.

Indeed, although important efforts are being carried out to improve the archaeointensity Western European database including Iberia (e.g.: Genevey et al., 2013; Gómez-Paccard et al., 2012, 2016), data are still relatively scarce and temporarily unevenly distributed.

These kilns lack of independent dates (beyond the relative chronological information provided by the archaeological context), so the obtained absolute archaeointensity and directional results cannot be used as input data to refine SV curves or geomagnetic field models.

Nevertheless, important archaeological information is obtained as the results provide age intervals of last use for both kilns with a dating resolution comparable to radiocarbon.

For the moment, this is the only chronological information available at the site and is coherent with the archaeological context.

Its archaeological interest also resides in the fact that the chronological information obtained is directly related to the abandonment of both structures and not directly with material associated with them that could be younger as radiocarbon usually dates.

In summary, these results highlight the importance of maintaining a close collaboration between geophysicists and archaeologists in order to avoid the loss of information related to the cultural heritage.

If this study had not been done, the chronological information obtained about the last use of both kilns would never have been known.

SECTION

Conclusions

PARAGRAPH

Archaeomagnetic directional, archaeointensity and rock-magnetic study carried out on two kilns at the monastery of Cevico Navero has revealed different conclusions summarized as follows:

PARAGRAPH

A) The main magnetic carrier is Ti-poor titanomagnetite in pseudo-singledomain (PSD) state.

High Koenigsberger (Qn) ratio values, high reversibility in thermomagnetic curves and univectorial and stable NRM demagnetization diagrams indicate that the samples carry a TRM, being therefore suitable for absolute archaeointensity analysis.

Such behaviour is also indicative that the samples underwent high heating temperatures in the past (>600 °C).

PARAGRAPH

B) Two well-defined mean directions were obtained in the kilns.

The mean direction of the bells' kiln is: declination = 2.6°; inclination = 45.2°; alpha-95 (α95) = 1.8°; k = 221.3.

The mean direction of tiles' kiln is declination = 359.0°; inclination = 45.6°; α95 = 4.3°; k = 93.8.

The directional results obtained are statically acceptable, with α95 < 5° and a high precision parameter (k), indicating that they are well-defined and statistically robust.

PARAGRAPH

C) Two successful absolute archaeointensity determinations using the classical Thellier protocol were obtained in both kilns with mean values ranging from 48.5 to 59.5 μT.

PARAGRAPH

D) The comparison of the mean direction and intensity obtained in both kilns with the SCHA.DIF.14k model has determined a single interval of last use for the bells´ kiln between 1301–1391 CE and for the tiles´ kiln between 1295–1404 CE, at the 95% confidence level.

These dates agree well with the archaeological evidence indicating that the last use of both kilns occurred almost simultaneously or closely confined in time (14th century).

The dating resolution obtained is comparable to the radiocarbon with the benefit that archaeomagnetism dates the last use (abandonment) of the structures and no material associated to it which might be slightly younger.