10.1016/j.jhep.2019.10.028

FULLTEXT

TITLE

A defect in endothelial autophagy occurs in patients with nonalcoholic steatohepatitis and promotes inflammation and fibrosis

SECTION

Material and methods

PARAGRAPH

Human samples: Twenty-three patients who underwent a percutaneous or transjugular liver biopsy were selected from a pathological database: 5 had no or mild abnormalities at liver histological examination, 6 had simple steatosis and 12 had NASH, according to SAF score [29].

None of the patients had detectable anti-hepatitis C virus antibodies or HBs antigen.

Alcohol consumption was below 21 drinks on average per week in men and 14 drinks on average per week in women.

Patients’ metabolic features are presented in supplementary table 1.

All patients gave written consent to participate the study.

This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Paris North Hospitals, Paris 7 University, AP-HP (N° 2017-013).

The study conformed to the ethical guidelines of the 1975 Declaration of Helsinki.

Detailed methods for transmission electron microscopy analysis are described in supplementary material and methods.

PARAGRAPH

Animal Models: All mice were on a C57BL/6 background (male and female) and were housed on a 12 hrs light/dark cycle with ad-libitum access to food and water.

All animals received humane care according to the criteria outlined in the “Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals” prepared by the National Academy of Sciences and published by the National Institutes of Health (NIH publication 86-23 revised 1985).

All experiments were conducted in accordance with the European Community guidelines for the care and use of laboratory animals.

Animal studies were approved by the institutional ethics committee and authorized by the French education and research ministry (# 12943 - 2017070617179577).

Mice constitutively deficient in endothelial autophagy were obtained by crossing VE-cadherin-Cre transgenic mice provided by M. Souyri [30], with Atg5lox/lox mice provided by N. Mizushima [31].

Littermate Atg5lox/lox mice were used as controls.

For transcriptomic analysis of LSECs at early stages of NASH, 8-week-old Atg5lox/lox and Atg5lox/lox;VE-cadherin-Cre mice were fed a high-fat diet (Safe U8220 version 16) containing 1.25% of cholesterol and 15% of cocoa butter (45% Kcal derived from lipids) for 2 weeks.

VE-cadherin is expressed during embryonic development in a common progenitor to endothelial and some myeloid cells [32].

To avoid the leak of ATG5 deletion in myeloid cells, all mice used in experiments aiming at assessing the impact of the deficiency in endothelial autophagy on NASH or fibrosis were irradiated and transplanted with a bone marrow from Atg5lox/lox mice.

For the study of initial steps of NASH development, 12-week-old Atg5lox/lox and Atg5lox/lox;VE-cadherin-Cre mice were fed a chow or a high-fat diet (Safe U8220 version 16) for 16 weeks.

For the study of advanced stages of liver fibrosis, Atg5lox/lox and Atg5lox/lox;VE-cadherin-Cre mice received a single injection of clodronate (clodronateliposomes.org) in addition to the bone marrow transplant.

Mice then chronically received intraperitoneal injections of carbon tetrachloride (CCl4, Sigma Aldrich 319961) suspended in peanut oil (Sigma Aldrich P2144) at 0.24mL/kg, three times a week for 6 consecutive weeks.

Control mice received intraperitoneal injection of peanut oil.

At the end of each protocol, blood was collected from inferior vena cava under isofluorane anesthesia.

Mice fed a high-fat diet were fasted for 6 hrs before blood collection.

Mice were humanely euthanized.

Animals were then perfused with 10 mL of saline and organs (liver, spleen and heart) were harvested.

One part of the liver was fixed in 10% formalin and the remaining tissue was immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until processing.

Details regarding blood pressure measurement, blood cell count, plasma preparation, plasma biochemical measurements, hepatic lipid analysis and histopathology, are provided in the supplementary material and methods.

Based on our experience on transgenic mouse models, and considering the 3Rs rule, we included 5 to 15 mice per group in all sets of experiments.

PARAGRAPH

Primary LSECs isolation: The protocol was adapted from Desroches-Castan et al. [33].

Briefly, liver of anesthetized Atg5lox/lox and Atg5lox/lox;VE-cadherin-Cre mice was perfused via inferior vena cava with ethylene glycol tetraacetic acid solution followed by collagenase solution and then manually dissociated.

Hepatocytes and hepatic stellate cells were eliminated by density gradient centrifugation.

LSECs were selected using MACS CD146 Microbead (Miltenyi 130-092-007) and plated on collagen-coated dishes.

Purity assessed using fluorescent acetylated-LDL internalization (Thermofisher L23380; 20 minutes incubation at 5 μg/mL in serum-free media) was >95%.

Cells were lyzed 2 hours after plating for RNA or protein extraction as detailed in supplementary material and methods.

PARAGRAPH

Transformed liver sinusoidal Endothelial Cells culture (TSECs): Due to the impossibility to maintain primary LSECs viability and features for a long period of time in vitro [7,16], we used the immortalized murine liver endothelial cells line, TSECs, [34] provided by Dr. Vijay Shah (Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN).

Cells were cultured on 0.2 % gelatin-coated slides (Menzel Glazer; Braunschweig, Germany) in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium containing 1% endothelial cell growth supplement (Sciencell 1052), 5% fetal bovine serum, streptomycin (100 IU/mL), penicillin (100 IU/mL) and Amphotericin B (10 μg/L) (Gibco).

PARAGRAPH

Lentiviral transduction: Lentiviruses expressing inducible shRNA (Sigma Aldrich, MISSION® inducible shRNA Vectors) were used to silence ATG5.

TSECs were infected in the presence of hexadimethrine bromide (Sigma Aldrich H9268) at 8 μg/mL with lentiviruses at multiplicity of infection (MOI) 2.5.

Negative controls were lentiviruses expressing a non-target shRNA, used at the same MOI.

Transduced cells were amplified and selected using puromycine (Sigma Aldrich P9620) at 1 μg/mL during the amplification period.

shRNA expression was induced by treating the transduced cells with Isopropyl β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside (Sigma Aldrich I6758) for 5 consecutive days at 0.1 mmol/L.

ATG5 knockdown was verified in all experiments.

Experiments in which ATG5 extinction was lower than 30% were systematically excluded.

PARAGRAPH

Shear stress experiment in vitro: A unidirectional steady laminar and peristaltic shear stress was applied to confluent TSECs to mimic physiological conditions, using a parallel plate chamber system, as described elsewhere [35].

Endothelial cell medium was perfused for 24 hrs.

Local shear stress was calculated using Poiseuille’s law and set at 20 dynes/cm2 [36].

To analyze the effect of mediators present in the portal blood on autophagy level, TSECs were treated during the 24 hrs of shear stress with CCL2 (100 pg/mL, R&D systems), or insulin (1 nmol/L, Sigma Aldrich), or TNFα (10 pg/mL, Peprotech), or IL6 (10 pg/mL, Peprotech), or with the combination of TNFα and IL6 (10 pg/mL for each) at concentrations similar to those reported in the portal venous blood in metabolic syndrome [37–40].

In some experiments, cells were treated with chloroquine (300 μmol/L, Sigma Aldrich) for 2 or 6 hours before the end of the shear stress experiment, in order to assess autophagic flux.

The effect of autophagy deficiency in TSECs on endothelial inflammation, endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition and endothelial apoptosis was tested in basal conditions as well as after stimulation of TSECs with the pro-inflammatory stimulus TNFα (1 ng/mL) for 12 hrs before the end of the shear stress experiment.

TSECs and supernatants were then collected for Western blot, quantitative reverse transcription-PCR, flow cytometry, immunofluorescence microscopy, enzyme-linked immunoadsorbent assay or Luminex assay as detailed in supplementary material and methods.

PARAGRAPH

Statistical analysis: Data are expressed as median ± IQR for human data and in vivo experiments, and as mean ± SEM for in vitro experiments.

Comparisons were performed using the Mann-Whitney U-test.

Spearman correlation analysis was used to evaluate the relationship between the percentage of LSECs containing autophagic vacuoles and patients clinical and laboratory features.

All tests were two-sided and a significance level of 0.05 was used.

All statistical analyses and figures were performed using GraphPad Prism 7 software for Mac OS X.

SECTION

Results

SECTION

Autophagy is defective in LSECs in NASH

PARAGRAPH

We first investigated liver endothelial autophagy in NAFLD by performing transmission electron microscopy on liver biopsies from patients.

In patients with NASH, LSECs contained autophagic vacuoles twice less frequently than in patients with no or mild abnormalities at liver histological examination or in patients with simple steatosis (Figure 1A and B).

We also measured the size of these autophagic vacuoles.

Patients with simple steatosis had larger autophagic vacuoles than patients with no or mild abnormalities at liver histological examination.

Patients with NASH had smaller autophagic vacuoles than the two other groups of patients (Figure 1C).

Altogether, these results suggest that NASH is associated with a defect in liver endothelial autophagy.

PARAGRAPH

We then analyzed features influencing liver endothelial autophagy level in these patients.

As shown in Supplementary Table 2, the number of autophagic vacuoles in LSECs from patients negatively correlated with liver activity, according to SAF score [29], but did not correlate with histological fibrosis or steatosis, nor with clinical and laboratory features.

No association was either observed with gender (p=0.7), diabetes (p=0.6), dyslipidemia (p=0.9) or hypertension (p=0.3) (data not shown).

PARAGRAPH

We then sought to identify mediators present in the portal blood accounting for such a possible defect in liver endothelial autophagy.

We used TSECs, i.e. immortalized liver endothelial cells [34], exposed to shear stress to mimic in vivo conditions.

Shear stress activated autophagic flux, since LC3-II/GAPDH ratio was increased by shear stress and further augmented when the inhibitor of autophagic flux, chloroquine, was added (Supplementary Figure 1), as previously observed in endothelial cells of large arteries [35].

We observed that IL6, TNFα, CCL2, or insulin alone, at concentrations similar to those found in the portal vein of rodents and patients with metabolic syndrome [37–40], did not change LC3-II/GAPDH ratio (Supplementary Figure 2).

Interestingly, the combination of TNFα and IL6 decreased LC3 area using immunofluorescence (p=0.014) (Figure 1D) and LC3-II/GAPDH ratio (p=0.0001) (Figure 1E).

Since such a decrease in LC3-II/GAPDH ratio can be explained both by a reduced or enhanced autophagic flux [41], we performed the same experiment in the presence of the blocker of autophagic flux, chloroquine.

As shown in Figure 1E, chloroquine significantly increased LC3-II/GAPDH in the absence as well as in the presence of TNFα and IL6, but this ratio was not higher in cells treated with the combination of TNFα and IL6 than in untreated cells.

This demonstrates that the lower LC3-II expression observed in cells exposed to TNFα and IL6 (Figure 1D and E) was not due to an enhanced autophagic flux but rather to a decreased flux.

PARAGRAPH

We then investigated pathways by which TNFα and IL6 regulate autophagy in TSECs.

AMPKα and the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathways are master positive and negative regulators of autophagy, respectively [42].

We observed that the combination of TNFα and IL6 reduced p-AMPKα/GAPDH ratio (Figure 1F), while total AMPK levels were unchanged (Figure 1G).

p-4E-BP1/GAPDH ratio was unchanged between untreated cells and cells treated with TNFα and IL6 (Figure 1H), attesting that TNFα and IL6 modulate AMPKα activity but not mTOR activity.

Of note, combination of TNFα and IL6 did not modulate TSECs expression of key autophagy proteins ATG5 and ATG3 and slightly decreased Beclin-1 level (p=0.04) (Supplementary Figure 3).

PARAGRAPH

We also tested the effect of toxic lipids involved in NASH pathogenesis [2,43,44], As shown in Supplementary Figure 4, palmitic acid treatment increased LC3-II/GAPDH ratio in TSECs (p=0.004).

In the presence of chloroquine, LC3-II/GAPDH ratio was similar in cells treated with palmitic acid and in untreated cells.

PARAGRAPH

Taken together, these results suggest that a defect in liver endothelial autophagic flux occurs in NASH, due to an inhibition of AMPKα activity induced by the combination of TNFα and IL6.

PARAGRAPH

Deficiency in liver endothelial cell autophagy leads to endothelial inflammation, endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition and endothelial apoptosis

PARAGRAPH

To assess the consequences of a deficiency in autophagy on liver endothelial cell phenotype, we inhibited autophagy in TSECs using a genetic approach (transduction with a lentivirus expressing an ATG5 shRNA; Supplementary Figure 5) and exposed these cells to a physiological shear stress mimicking in vivo conditions.

Since autophagy is a central mechanism of adaptation to stress, we analyzed TSECs in basal conditions as well as in the presence of a stress induced by TNFα.

PARAGRAPH

We first tested whether autophagy regulates endothelial inflammatory responses.

In basal conditions, Ccl5 gene expression was higher in TSECs deficient in autophagy than in control cells (p<0.0001), while Ccl2 gene expression was unchanged (Supplementary Figure 6A).

After exposure to the proinflammatory stimulus TNFα, TSECs deficient in autophagy expressed 1.5-fold more Ccl2 (p=0.002) and 2.5-fold more Ccl5 (p=0.002) than control TSECs (Figure 2A).

PARAGRAPH

CCL2, CCL5 and IL-6 concentration was also higher in cell culture supernatant of TSECs deficient in autophagy than in the supernatant of control cells in basal conditions as well as after exposure to the proinflammatory stimulus TNFα (Table 1).

Moreover, VCAM-1 expression at cell surface, evaluated using flow cytometry, was higher in TSECs deficient in ATG5 than in TSECs transduced with a control shRNA after exposure to the proinflammatory stimulus TNFα (p=0.005) (Figure 2B), while its expression was unchanged in basal conditions (Supplementary Figure 6B).

PARAGRAPH

We also evaluated features of endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition.

In basal conditions, α-SMA, Tgf-β1 and Collagen1α2 gene expression was not affected by autophagy level (Supplementary Figure 6C).

After exposure to the proinflammatory stimulus TNFα, α-SMA, Tgf-β1 and Collagen1α2 gene expression was higher in TSECs deficient in autophagy than in control cells (p=0.002) (Figure 2C).

Moreover, TGF-β1 concentration tended to be higher in the supernatant of TSECs deficient in autophagy than in the supernatant of control cells in basal conditions as well as after exposure to the proinflammatory stimulus TNFα (Table 1).

PARAGRAPH

Finally, we assessed the effect of a deficiency in autophagy on endothelial apoptosis.

Cleaved Caspase-3/GAPDH ratio was increased in TSECs deficient in autophagy in basal conditions as well as after exposure to the proinflammatory stimulus TNFα (p=0.002 and p=0.03 respectively) (Supplementary Figure 6D and Figure 2D respectively).

We also assessed apoptosis using Sytox green assay by flow cytometry.

Sytox green staining tended to increase in autophagy deficient TSECs as compared to control cells in basal conditions (Supplementary Figure 6E), without reaching statistical significance.

After exposure to the proinflammatory stimulus TNFα, Sytox green staining was significantly higher in TSECs deficient in autophagy than in control cells (p=0.02) (Figure 2E).

PARAGRAPH

Taken together, these results show that a deficiency in autophagy in liver endothelial cells induces features of endothelial inflammation, of endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition and endothelial cell death that are more obvious under conditions of stress.

PARAGRAPH

In order to test the in vivo relevance of these findings, we performed a transcriptomic analysis on primary LSECs isolated from Atg5lox/lox and Atg5lox/lox;VE-cadherin-Cre mice fed a high-fat diet for 2 weeks.

As expected, primary LSECs isolated from Atg5lox/lox;VE-cadherin-Cre mice displayed a defect in autophagy (Supplementary Figure 7).

Transcriptomic analysis revealed major changes in inflammatory pathways in LSECs from mice deficient in endothelial as compared with Atg5lox/lox mice (Figure 3A and B, Supplementary Table 3), in line with the endothelial inflammation observed in TSECs.

Several of these genes (e.g. Il1b, Il6, Ccl2, Ccl5, Cd86, Vcam-1, Ptgs2) are regulated by NF-B transcription factor.

PARAGRAPH

Tanscriptomic analysis also revealed a more modest enrichment in angiogenesis pathways (Supplementary Table 3, Figure 3 A and C).

We then measured VEGF-A concentration in culture supernatant of TSECs and observed that TSECs deficient in autophagy released more VEGF-A than control TSECs, both in basal conditions and after exposure to TNF⍺ (Table 1).

PARAGRAPH

Taken together, these results show that, upon exposure to high-fat diet, LSECs deficient in autophagy rapidly and strongly modulate genes involved in inflammation and to a lesser extent gene involved in angiogenesis.

SECTION

Deficiency in endothelial autophagy promotes NASH development in mice

PARAGRAPH

To assess the role of endothelial autophagy at early stages of NASH, Atg5lox/lox and Atg5lox/lox;VE-cadherin-Cre mice were fed a chow or a high-fat diet for 16 weeks (Supplementary Figure 8).

PARAGRAPH

As expected in this mouse model reproducing early stages of NASH [45], steatosis, markers of liver injury (plasma AST and ALT levels, liver cleaved Caspase-3 immunostaining) (Figure 4 and Supplementary Figure 9), and of liver inflammation (liver Ccl2, Cd68 and VCAM-1 expression) (Figure 5) were higher in Atg5lox/lox mice fed a high-fat diet than in Atg5lox/lox mice fed a chow diet.

Markers of liver fibrosis were similar (Figure 6).

PARAGRAPH

When fed a chow diet, mice deficient in endothelial autophagy had similar markers of liver injury, of liver inflammation and of liver fibrosis (Figures 4 to 6) as littermate controls.

Only Cd68 gene expression was higher in the liver of Atg5lox/lox;VE-cadherin-Cre mice than in Atg5lox/lox mice fed a chow diet (Figure 5C).

PARAGRAPH

When fed a high-fat diet, mice deficient in endothelial autophagy had more frequently a nodular liver surface (20% vs. 78% respectively, p<0.0001) (Figure 4A), higher markers of liver injury (plasma AST levels (p=0.06) and liver cleaved Caspase-3 expression (p=0.01)) (Figure 4C and D), and higher markers of liver inflammation (liver Ccl2 and Ccl5 gene expression and liver VCAM-1 protein expression; Figure 5 A,B,D) and inflammatory cells infiltration (Cd68 gene expression; Figure 5C).

Other markers of inflammatory cells infiltration (Cd11b and Ly6c gene expression) were not significantly higher (Supplementary figure 10).

Mice deficient in endothelial autophagy fed a high-fat diet also had a higher fibrogenesis (liver α-SMA protein expression, liver Tgf-β1 and Collagen1α2 gene expression, liver collagen staining with Sirius red) than littermate controls (Figure 6).

Of note, liver fibrosis was mainly perisinusoidal in mice deficient in endothelial autophagy (Figure 6E).

In mice fed a high-fat diet, deficiency in endothelial autophagy had no impact on ALT levels (Figure 4C), and on liver steatosis assessed by histology (Figure 4B) or by liver triglyceride content (Supplement Figure 9A).

Liver cholesterol content was slightly lower in Atg5lox/lox;VE-cadherin-Cre mice than in Atg5lox/lox mice (Supplement Figure 9B).

PARAGRAPH

Deficiency in endothelial ATG5 had no effect on body weight, organs weight, blood cell count, arterial blood pressure, plasma cholesterol, triglycerides and glucose levels.

Only liver weight/body weight ratio was slightly lower in mice deficient in endothelial autophagy fed a high-fat diet than in littermate controls (p=0.01) (Supplementary Table 4).

PARAGRAPH

Taken together, these findings indicate that deficiency in endothelial autophagy induces liver injury and inflammation, and promotes liver fibrogenesis in NAFLD setting.

SECTION

Deficiency in endothelial autophagy promotes liver fibrosis deposition in mice chronically treated with carbon tetrachloride

PARAGRAPH

To determine whether endothelial autophagy is also involved at more advanced stages of chronic liver diseases progression, we chronically treated Atg5lox/lox and Atg5lox/lox;VE-cadherin-Cre mice with carbon tetrachloride (CCl4) or its vehicle for 6 weeks (Supplementary Figure 11).

PARAGRAPH

As expected, markers of liver injury (plasma AST and ALT levels) (Supplementary Figure 12B), liver inflammation (liver Ccl5 gene expression) (Supplementary Figure 12C), and fibrogenesis (liver α-SMA, Tgf-β1 and Collagen1α2 gene expression, and liver collagen staining with Sirius red) (Figure 7) were higher in Atg5lox/lox mice treated with CCl4 than in Atg5lox/lox mice treated with vehicle.

PARAGRAPH

When compared with littermate controls, mice deficient in endothelial autophagy had higher levels of markers of fibrogenesis (liver α-SMA, Tgf-β1 and Collagen1α2 gene expression, and liver collagen staining with Sirius red) when treated with CCl4 (Figure 7).

Of note, liver fibrosis was mainly perisinusoidal in mice deficient in endothelial autophagy (Figure 7D).

Deficiency in endothelial ATG5 had no effect on body and organ weight, blood cell count (Supplementary Table 5), markers of liver injury (plasma AST and ALT levels) (Supplementary Figure 12B) or markers of liver inflammation (liver Ccl2 and Ccl5 gene expression) (Supplementary Figure 12C) in mice treated with CCl4.

PARAGRAPH

These findings demonstrate that deficiency in endothelial autophagy promotes liver fibrosis development at more advanced stages of chronic liver diseases progression.

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

This study provides strong evidence suggesting that NASH is associated with a defect in liver endothelial autophagy, while simple steatosis is not.

This defect was mimicked in vitro by low concentrations of inflammatory mediators present in the portal blood of patients with metabolic syndrome.

This defect in autophagy promoted liver endothelial cell inflammation, features suggesting endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition and endothelial apoptosis, favoring the development of NASH and liver fibrosis.

PARAGRAPH

The first major finding in this study was the observation that LSECs from patients with NASH display less autophagic vacuoles than LSECs from patients with a normal liver or with simple steatosis.

Although such a low number of autophagic vacuoles could result from increased autophagic flux [46], this hypothesis seems very unlikely.

First, our finding that autophagic vacuoles in LSECs from patients with NASH were smaller than in patients with a normal liver or with simple steatosis, supports the hypothesis of a defect in autophagy in LSECs in NASH, since smaller autophagic vacuoles have been associated with lower autophagic flux [47–49].

Second, we demonstrated that cultured TSECs exposed to shear stress -to mimic stimulation of autophagy existing in vivo- and to a combination of TNFα and IL6 at concentrations similar to those observed in the portal blood of patients with metabolic syndrome [37–40] displayed a decreased autophagic flux, based on chloroquine experiments.

Third, we showed that a defect in autophagy in liver endothelial cells reproduces the increased expression of Ccl2 and VCAM-1 reported in LSECs in mouse models of NASH [44,50].

Although the mechanisms linking the defect in liver endothelial autophagy with this inflammatory phenotype have not been determined, the broad over expression of inflammatory genes we demonstrated here in LSECs from Atg5lox/lox;VE-cadherin-Cre mice using transcriptomics, and previous results obtained in endothelial cells from large arteries, let us speculate that the defect in endothelial autophagy might induce a decrease in expression of KLF2 and in turn an activation of NF-B [35,51].

The results obtained here in patients with NASH are a step forward in our understanding of liver autophagy, since autophagy had not been assessed in liver endothelial cells in patients with chronic liver disease.

More generally, if we and others showed that a defect in endothelial autophagy favors atherosclerosis development [35,52], the impact of metabolic syndrome on endothelial autophagy had not been investigated in any vascular bed, neither in patients nor in animals.

Moreover, while sex differences in NAFLD are well known [53], it should be stressed that we included in this study both male and female patients and animals, implying that the observed regulation and effects of endothelial autophagy is a general process, not restricted to one gender.

PARAGRAPH

The second major finding in the present study was the observation that a defect in endothelial autophagy promotes NASH and liver fibrosis in mice.

The effects we observed were not mediated by an influence of the defect in endothelial autophagy on metabolic risk factors, as body weight, arterial blood pressure, plasma cholesterol and triglycerides as well as fasting glucose levels were not different between mice deficient or not in endothelial autophagy in basal conditions or when fed a high-fat diet.

Our results extend the recent description by Ruart et al. of a protective role of autophagy in LSECs at early phases of liver disease [27].

Indeed, these authors showed an increase in liver fibrosis after 1-week of CCL4 treatment in mice deficient in the key autophagy protein ATG7 (Atg7lox/lox;VE-cadherin-Cre mice) [27].

Our observations of a protective role of endothelial autophagy in NASH and liver fibrosis complete the picture of the role of autophagy in chronic liver diseases, since previous studies demonstrated that hepatocyte autophagy protects against fat accumulation and liver injury during fatty liver disease [21–24], that macrophages autophagy is an anti-inflammatory pathway in the liver, with protective anti-fibrogenic effects [21,22,25], and that, by contrast, autophagy is profibrogenic in hepatic stellate cells [21,22,26].

PARAGRAPH

In the present study, the main effect of the deficiency in endothelial autophagy was an increase in liver fibrosis, an effect observed in a mouse model of fatty liver disease and of liver fibrosis induced by the chronic administration of CCl4.

It should be emphasized that in both models, liver fibrosis was mainly perisinusoidal, a feature typically observed in patients with NASH related fibrosis [29].

Based on the results we and others obtained, several mechanisms can be put forward to explain how a defect in autophagy in LSECs induces perisinusoidal fibrosis.

First, we demonstrated here that a defect in autophagy in LSECs induces a strong expression of inflammatory molecules that may act on neighboring hepatic stellate cells and promote their activation [5,54].

Second, we also observed that a defect in autophagy in LSECs activates angiogenic pathways known to be pro-fibrogenic in NASH [2,5].

Third, Ruart et al. previously showed that a defect in autophagy in LSEC induces LSECs dysfunction [27], that favors hepatic stellate cells activation and fibrosis in NASH [5].

Finally, besides hepatic stellate cells activation, we also provide here evidence for an original complementary hypothesis that could account for the perisinusoidal location of liver fibrosis we observed, namely endothelial-to mesenchymal transition [5].

Indeed, we demonstrated, using cultured TSECs, that a defect in autophagy is associated with an overexpression of α-SMA in TSECs, together with an overexpression of Tgf-β1 and Collagen1α2, i.e. typical features of endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition.

This suggests that the pool of hepatic myofibroblasts in NASH may not only originate from hepatic stellate cells, but also from endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition.

While this phenomenon has been well described in fibrotic cardiovascular and pulmonary diseases [55–57], rare studies described endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition in the liver [5,58] and suggested that this process is marginal in fibrosis induced by chronic toxic injury.

However, endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition might be more prominent in NASH than in other chronic liver diseases, as suggested by the frequent perisinusoidal fibrosis in this disease.

PARAGRAPH

In conclusion, this study provides new insights into our understanding of the role of LSECs in the development of NASH and liver fibrosis.

Autophagy is defective in LSECs in NASH and this defect can be attributed, at least in part, to inflammatory mediators present in the portal venous blood.

Deficiency in autophagy in LSECs induces endothelial inflammation, features of endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition and apoptosis, thus promoting liver inflammation and fibrosis at early and advanced stages of NASH and chronic liver disease.

Liver endothelial autophagy level might be the missing link explaining why some patients with simple steatosis progress to NASH and liver fibrosis while others do not.

Targeting specifically liver endothelial autophagy may be an attractive strategy for NASH treatment.