10.1016/j.jhep.2019.09.030

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Von Willebrand factor delays liver repair after acetaminophen-induced acute liver injury in mice

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Acetaminophen (paracetamol, APAP) overdose is a leading cause of drug-induced acute liver injury and acute liver failure (ALF) in the Western world.1

Accumulating evidence from experimental and clinical studies suggests that the hemostatic system contributes to the progression of acute liver injury after APAP overdose.2–4

Although not associated with clinically significant bleeding,5 substantial alterations in the hemostatic system are evident in patients with APAP-induced liver failure, including a reduced platelet count.6,7

The ALF study group has demonstrated in a large cohort of ALF patients that a much more profound thrombocytopenia is associated with poor outcome (i.e. death or the need for a liver transplant).8

Platelets have been proposed to drive disease progression through the formation of microthrombi within the liver microvasculature.9

APAP-induced liver damage in mice causes persistent thrombocytopenia, which is coupled to accumulation of platelets in the injured liver.3

Notably, platelets have been shown to promote APAP-induced liver injury in mice.3

However, the mechanisms driving platelet accumulation in the APAP-injured liver remain to be elucidated.

PARAGRAPH

The platelet-adhesive glycoprotein von Willebrand factor (VWF) is a key component of the hemostatic system.

VWF synthesis is restricted to endothelial cells and megakaryocytes.10

Following vascular damage, VWF binds to subendothelial collagens, which activate VWF to serve as an adhesion molecule for platelets, thereby initiating platelet plug formation.11

VWF is a multimeric protein and its reactivity towards platelets depends on the size of its multimers.

The high molecular weight (HMW) multimers are the most effective in supporting platelet adhesion.10,12

Multimeric size of VWF is regulated by ADAMTS13 (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with a thrombospondin type 1 motif, member 13), which proteolytically cleaves the large multimers into smaller, less active multimers.12

VWF size regulation is important for normal hemostatic function, as demonstrated by patients with a congenital or acquired ADAMTS13 deficiency, who suffer from severe thrombotic episodes.13

PARAGRAPH

VWF plasma levels are highly elevated in patients with ALF,2,14 while ADAMTS13 levels are reduced.2,15

It has been proposed that insufficient regulation of VWF activity could cause hepatic platelet-induced microthrombi formation that drives disease progression.2

Although several studies have reported elevated VWF levels in patients with liver disease,2,14,16 the basis for this increase is unclear.

In addition, a direct mechanistic connection between VWF and the progression of liver injury has not yet been established.

We tested the hypothesis that VWF contributes to experimental acute liver injury.

Using genetic and antibody-mediated strategies to target VWF, we determined the contribution of VWF to both APAP-induced liver injury and repair of the injured liver.

Our results establish a clear mechanistic connection between changes in VWF, hepatic platelet accumulation and liver repair, suggesting an explanation for clinical observations.

SECTION

Materials and methods

SECTION

Mice

PARAGRAPH

Vwf−/− mice on a congenic C57Bl/6J background were obtained from Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME) and maintained by homozygous breeding.

These mice have been described previously.17

Age- and sex-matched wild-type mice on an identical C57Bl/6J background were used as control mice.

A total of 140 male mice were used for these studies between the ages of 8–14 weeks.

Mice were housed under a 12 h light/dark cycle and standard diet (Teklad 8940), and drinking water was provided ad libitum.

The Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Michigan State University, East Lansing, USA, approved all animal procedures.

SECTION

Acetaminophen-induced acute liver injury

PARAGRAPH

Mice were fasted overnight (i.e., for approximately 15 h) on new alpha-dry bedding, before administration of 300 mg/kg APAP (30 µl/g body weight) or vehicle (warm sterile saline, 0.9% sodium chloride) via intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection, as described previously.18

Food was returned immediately after injection.

For VWF supplementation studies, Vwf−/− mice were treated with APAP, and 3 h later received human plasma-derived VWF (3U VWF:RCo/mouse, Humate-P, CSL Behring, obtained from MSU Clinical Center Pharmacy) or vehicle (saline) via i.p injection, as described.19

For studies in which VWF was blocked, wild-type mice were treated with APAP, and 4 h and 24 h later a rabbit polyclonal anti-VWF antibody (50 µg/mouse, DAKO, A0082, Glostrup, Denmark, dialyzed against endotoxin-free PBS) or rabbit IgG control (50 µg/mouse, Innovative Research, Novi, MI, dialyzed against endotoxin-free PBS) was injected i.p. For studies blocking the platelet integrin αIIbβ3, wild-type mice were challenged with APAP, and treated with GR144053 (10 mg/kg, R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN) or vehicle (saline) by i.p. injection 12 h and 24 h later.

Blood and liver samples were collected 24 h, 48 h or 72 h after APAP administration.

Blood was collected under isoflurane anesthesia by exsanguination from the inferior vena cava into a syringe containing sodium citrate (0.38% final) for the collection of plasma.

Blood samples were centrifuged at 4,000×g for 10 min to obtain plasma and were stored at −80 °C.

Livers were rinsed in PBS and fixed in either 10% neutral-buffered formalin or snap frozen in liquid nitrogen.

SECTION

Clearance of human VWF in APAP-challenged mice

PARAGRAPH

Male Vwf−/− mice were treated with 300 mg/kg APAP or vehicle (saline) as described above.

Twenty-four hours after APAP or vehicle administration, mice were treated with a single dose (3U VWF:RCo/mouse) of VWF concentrate (Humate-P, CSL Behring) by retro-orbital injection.

Injections were performed under anesthesia using isoflurane.

At 30 min, 1 h, 2 h, 4 h and 8 h after injection, blood was collected into citrate as described above from separate cohorts of mice at each time point.

VWF:Ag was measured as described below, and expressed as a percentage of the injected amount, which was set at 100%.

SECTION

Measurement of liver necrosis and hepatocyte proliferation

PARAGRAPH

Paraffin-embedded livers were sectioned at 5 µm and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) or labeled for proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), as described previously.20

All immunohistochemical labeling was performed by the MSU Investigative Histopathology Laboratory, a division of Human Pathology.

Necrosis area was calculated as described previously.20

Serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) activity was determined using commercial reagents (ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA).

SECTION

Immunofluorescent labeling of liver sections

PARAGRAPH

Fibrin(ogen), VWF and platelets were detected by immunofluorescent labeling of frozen liver sections.

Briefly, frozen liver pieces were sectioned at 8 µm and fixed in 4% neutral-buffered formalin for 10 min.

The sections were blocked in 10% normal goat serum in PBS for 1 h at room temperature and incubated with polyclonal rabbit anti-human fibrin(ogen) antibody (DAKO, A0080, 1:2,500) or polyclonal rabbit anti-human VWF (DAKO, A0082, 1:400) overnight at 4 °C.

Primary antibodies were detected using Alexa Fluor 594-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG or Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG secondary antibody (Jackson Immunoresearch, West Grove, PA, USA, 1:500), respectively.

The sections were scanned with a VS110 Virtual Slide System.

The area of positive labeling was quantified in 4 or 5 randomly selected images (captured with a 5x virtual objective in OLYVIA Software, approximately 2.75 mm2 of liver tissue per image) in an unbiased fashion using a batch macro and color de-convolution tool in Fiji (imageJ).

Co-localization of VWF with platelets was examined in frozen liver tissues.

Sections were cut, fixed and blocked as described above.

The sections were first incubated with monoclonal rat anti-mouse CD41 (clone MWReg30, Biolegend, 1:200) overnight at 4 °C and then for 2 h at room temperature with polyclonal rabbit anti-human VWF (DAKO, A0082, 1:400).

Staining was detected with cross-adsorbed Alexa 594-conjugated secondary goat anti-rat antibody and Alexa 488-conjugated secondary goat anti-rabbit IgG (Jackson Immunoresearch, 1:500), respectively.

Fluorescent images were captured at 100x total magnification using Olympus DP70 microscope (Olympus, Lake Success, NY).

The area of positive platelet labeling was quantified in 4 or 5 randomly selected images (approximately 0.5 mm2 of liver tissue per image) from each mouse liver in an unbiased fashion using a batch macro and color de-convolution tool in Fiji (ImageJ).

SECTION

Measurement of VWF plasma level, size, activity, and thrombin-antithrombin complexes

PARAGRAPH

Plasma VWF antigen levels were determined by ELISA, as previously described.21

Pooled normal mouse plasma or pooled normal human plasma was used to develop a standard curve.

The Hydragel 5 VWF multimers kit (H5VWM, PN4359 and VWF multimer visualization kit, PN4747, Sebia) was used with Hydrasys 2 Scan instrumentation to perform semi-automated agarose gel electrophoresis using preformed 2% agarose gels, direct immunofixation, and visualization with peroxidase-labeled antibody as recommended by the manufacturer.22

In order to enhance the intensity of the murine VWF multimer signal, dilution was adjusted from the standard 1:6 for human plasma samples to a 1:1 dilution for mouse samples.

A pooled normal mouse plasma was included on each gel.

VWF multimer analysis was performed at the Thrombosis Center of the Cincinnati Children’s Hospital.

The first 4 bands were considered low-molecular weight (LMW) multimers, while the other bands were considered HMW multimers.

Gels were scanned using the Hydrasys 2 Scan and analyzed with the ImageJ gel analysis tool.

Data were expressed as the percentage of HMW multimers per total VWF multimers.

The ability of VWF to bind to immobilized collagen was assessed using a VWF collagen binding activity (VWF:CB) assay, as described.23

In brief, collagen type III (Sigma Type X, C4407) was dissolved in 0.05 M acetic acid to 1 mg/ml.

Plates were coated with collagen overnight (diluted to 10 µg/ml in 50 mM carbonate buffer, pH 9.6, 115 µl/well), and after washing the plate was blocked for 1 h at 37 °C with blocking buffer (3% bovine serum albumin, 0.1% Tween20, in PBS).

A standard curve was generated by serial dilution of normal pooled mouse plasma (1:5 to 1:320 in blocking buffer).

Plasma samples (100 µl/well) were incubated for 2 h at 37 °C, and after washing the plate, bound VWF was detected using a peroxidase-conjugated anti-human VWF antibody (DAKO, P0226) (1:1,000 in blocking buffer, 100 µl/well, 1.5 h incubation at 37 °C).

Peroxidase activity was assessed using TMB substrate set (421101, Biolegend) according to the manufacturer’s instruction.

Plasma thrombin-antithrombin (TAT) levels were determined using a commercially available enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay kit (Siemens Health Care Diagnostics, Deerfield, IL).

SECTION

RNA isolation, cDNA synthesis and quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR)

PARAGRAPH

Small sections (~20 mg) of the liver lobes were collected for RNA isolation and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen.

RNA isolation, cDNA synthesis and qPCR were performed as described.18

Detection and quantification of select mRNAs by SYBR Green qPCR were performed using primers described previously.24

The expression of each gene was normalized to the geometric mean Ct of individual housekeeping genes, i.e. Hprt and Gapdh, and relative fold change was determined with the ΔΔCt method.

All fold changes were normalized relative to expression in wild-type mice.

A complete list of all gene names and primer sequences is provided in Table S1.

SECTION

Statistics

PARAGRAPH

Statistical analyses were performed with GraphPad Prism v.5 (San Diego, CA, USA) software package.

Clearance data was calculated as previously described.25

Continuous variables are presented as mean + SEM.

Comparison of 2 groups was performed using Student’s t test.

Comparison of 3 or more groups was performed using 1- or 2-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), as appropriate, with the Student-Newman-Keuls (SNK) post hoc test.

Differences were considered significant if the p value was <0.05.

SECTION

Results

SECTION

Impact of APAP-induced acute liver injury on plasma and hepatic VWF

PARAGRAPH

Plasma VWF:Ag levels initially decreased 24 h after APAP overdose relative to saline-treated control animals, but were increased 48 h after APAP challenge and remained elevated 72 h after APAP administration (Fig. 1A), in agreement with the elevated VWF:Ag levels in patients with ALF.2,14

The increase in VWF:Ag plasma levels was coupled with a slight increase in hepatic Vwf mRNA expression 24 h after APAP administration, but hepatic mRNA levels returned to baseline at 48 h and 72 h after APAP overdose (Fig. 1B).

The initial decrease in VWF:Ag plasma levels at 24 h was paralleled by robust hepatic accumulation of VWF in livers of APAP-treated mice (Fig. 1C).

The amount of hepatic VWF deposition decreased over time but remained significantly elevated compared to livers of saline-treated mice (Fig. 1D).

SECTION

VWF clearance is impaired after APAP-induced acute liver injury

PARAGRAPH

As VWF is mainly cleared by the liver,26 it has been proposed that the elevated VWF levels observed in patients with ALF could be a consequence of impaired hepatic clearance.

However, this concept has not yet been tested experimentally.

We therefore assessed clearance of VWF using Vwf−/− mice.

Vwf−/− mice were challenged with APAP or saline, and 24 h after challenge received a single intravenous injection of plasma-derived human VWF.

Liver injury was confirmed by increased ALT levels (data not shown).

Pharmacokinetic analysis showed that the mean residence time (MRT) of infused VWF was longer in APAP-challenged mice than in saline-treated mice (MRT of 194.7 min vs. MRT of 107.2 min), indicating that VWF clearance is indeed impaired in APAP-induced acute liver injury (Fig. 1E).

SECTION

Impact of APAP-induced acute liver injury on VWF multimer distribution and activity

PARAGRAPH

To assess whether APAP-induced liver injury affects VWF multimer distribution, we performed VWF multimer analysis using a semi-automated VWF multimer kit.

Analysis of plasma VWF multimers in healthy wild-type mice using the Hydrasys 2 Scan instrument revealed a multimer pattern consistent with the conventional analysis approach.27

Specificity was documented by the absence of a detectable signal in plasma from Vwf−/− mice (Fig. S1).

VWF multimer analysis was next performed in plasma from APAP-challenged wild-type mice.

HMW VWF multimers were reduced 24 h after APAP challenge (Fig. 2A-C), corresponding to a reduction in plasma VWF:CB (Fig. 2D).

The increase in VWF:Ag levels at 48 h and 72 h after APAP challenge (Fig. 1A) was also evident by multimer analysis (Fig. 2A).

Although total VWF antigen levels were higher at 48 h and 72 h, the fraction of plasma VWF with high activity (i.e., HMW multimers) at these times was reduced compared to saline-treated mice (Fig. 2C).

Thus, although total plasma VWF:CB 48 h and 72 h after APAP challenge exceeded that of saline control mice, the ratio of VWF:CB to VWF antigen (VWF:Ag) displayed a relative reduction (Fig. 2E).

Notably, these observations are consistent with what has been described for patients with ALF.2

SECTION

VWF deficiency does not affect coagulation activation after APAP-induced acute liver injury

PARAGRAPH

As we have previously shown that APAP overdose in mice is associated with activation of the coagulation cascade,4,28 we examined whether the deposition of VWF in the injured liver was connected to coagulation activation after APAP administration.

Consistent with previous studies,3,4,28 we observed a significant increase in plasma thrombin anti-thrombin (TAT) levels, indicative of coagulation activation, in wild-type mice after APAP administration (Fig. 3A).

However, there was no significant difference in TAT levels between wild-type or Vwf−/− mice 24 h after APAP challenge (Fig. 3A).

TAT plasma levels subsequently decreased over time in both wild-type and Vwf−/− mice, showing no difference between genotypes (Fig. 3A).

Intrahepatic deposition of fibrin(ogen) in the livers of APAP-treated mice at 24 h was primarily within the areas of hepatocellular necrosis (Fig. 3C).

VWF deficiency had no effect on the amount of hepatic fibrin(ogen) deposition 24 h after APAP challenge (Fig. 3B-C).

These results suggest that coagulation activation and deposition of fibrin(ogen) in the APAP-injured liver are not mechanistically connected to the deposition of VWF in the injured liver.

SECTION

VWF prolongs platelet accumulation in the APAP-injured liver

PARAGRAPH

APAP overdose in mice leads to rapid hepatic platelet accumulation.3

As VWF serves as an adhesion molecule for platelets, we speculated that hepatic platelet influx after APAP overdose is mediated by VWF.

APAP overdose caused platelet accumulation in the injured livers of wild-type mice, predominantly within areas of hepatocellular necrosis (Fig. 4A,C).

Focal co-localization of VWF and platelets, particularly in the liver sinusoids, persisted in livers of wild-type mice 48 h after APAP challenge (Fig. 4A,C).

Surprisingly, VWF deficiency did not significantly affect hepatic platelet accumulation 24 h after APAP administration, as we observed abundant platelet accumulation in Vwf−/− mice at this time (Fig. 4B,C).

Whereas platelets remained in the liver 48 h after APAP challenge in wild-type mice, platelets were nearly absent in livers of Vwf−/− mice 48 h and 72 h after APAP administration, suggesting a more rapid removal of accumulating platelets in the absence of VWF (Fig. 4B,C).

SECTION

VWF deficiency accelerates liver repair after APAP-induced acute liver injury

PARAGRAPH

Previous studies have shown increased VWF levels in patients with acute liver disease.2,14

We therefore investigated whether VWF contributes to APAP-induced acute liver injury and liver repair.

Increases in serum ALT activity, hepatocellular necrosis, and hepatic hemorrhage and congestion were not different between wild-type mice and Vwf−/− mice 24 h after APAP challenge, suggesting VWF does not contribute to initial APAP-induced liver injury (Fig. 5A-D).

Minimal repair of the liver was evident in wild-type mice at 48 h after APAP challenge (Fig. 5A-D).

This persistent necrosis in wild-type mice was associated with hemorrhage/congestion both within the necrotic areas and neighboring parenchymal tissue (Fig. 5C,D).

However, the area of hepatic necrosis was significantly reduced between 24 h and 48 h after APAP challenge in Vwf−/− mice (Fig. 5B,D).

In contrast to wild-type mice, hemorrhage and congestion was almost completely absent in Vwf−/− mice at this time point (Fig. 5C,D).

Whereas hepatic necrosis was essentially absent by 72 h in APAP-treated Vwf−/− mice, wild-type mice still displayed marked necrosis (Fig. 5B,D).

Survival also improved in APAP-challenged Vwf−/− mice, consistent with improved repair of the injured liver (Fig. S2).

The more rapid resolution of necrosis in Vwf−/− mice was coupled to an increase in hepatocyte proliferation, as the number of PCNA-positive hepatocyte nuclei was significantly greater in APAP-treated Vwf−/− mice at 24 h (Fig. 5E,F).

Hepatic cyclin gene expression tended to increase in APAP-challenged Vwf−/− mice (Fig. 5G), but these changes trailed the observed increase in hepatocyte PCNA labeling.

Collectively, the results indicate that VWF deficiency facilitates repair of the APAP-injured liver.

SECTION

Supplementation of VWF in Vwf−/− mice restores hepatic VWF and platelet deposition that impacts necrosis resolution in APAP-challenged mice

PARAGRAPH

To validate observations in Vwf−/− mice and confirm loss of VWF as the basis for accelerated liver repair in Vwf−/− mice, we supplemented Vwf−/− mice with human plasma-derived VWF (Humate-P).

Specifically, Vwf−/− mice were challenged with APAP and then received either VWF or saline as control 3 h after APAP challenge.

Compared to APAP-challenged Vwf−/− mice given saline, administration of VWF 3 h after APAP restored abundant deposition of VWF and dramatically increased platelet accumulation 48 h after APAP challenge (Fig. 6A,B).

Consistent with the notion that VWF inhibits repair of the APAP-injured liver, the restoration of hepatic VWF in APAP-challenged Vwf−/− mice was associated with a restoration of platelet deposits and more hepatic necrosis 48 h after APAP challenge (Fig. 6D,E).

SECTION

Blocking VWF or platelet integrin αIIbβ3 accelerates liver repair and decreases hepatic platelet deposition after APAP overdose

PARAGRAPH

To evaluate the effect of therapeutic VWF inhibition on hepatic platelet accumulation and liver repair after APAP overdose, we blocked VWF in wild-type mice with a polyclonal antibody against VWF, with previously established specificity.29–33

Wild-type mice were challenged with APAP and received either the VWF blocking antibody or purified rabbit IgG control, beginning 4 h after APAP overdose and again 24 h after APAP challenge.

In agreement with our observations in Vwf−/− mice, administration of the VWF blocking antibody significantly reduced hepatocellular necrosis 48 h after APAP challenge compared with mice receiving the control antibody (Fig. 7A,B).

Moreover, in agreement with observations in Vwf−/− mice, a dramatic reduction in hepatic platelet accumulation 48 h after APAP challenge was observed in mice that were treated with the VWF antibody (Fig. 7C).

PARAGRAPH

Because blocking VWF reduced platelet accumulation, we next determined whether targeting platelets directly would also affect liver repair after APAP challenge.

Specifically, wild-type mice were challenged with APAP and received either an αIIbβ3 antagonist (GR144053) or vehicle (saline) 12 h after APAP challenge.

Analogous to VWF deficiency or inhibition, administration of GR144053 significantly reduced hepatocellular necrosis 48 h after APAP challenge compared to vehicle-treated mice (Fig. 7D,E).

Moreover, and in agreement with our other observations, GR144053 treatment reduced hepatic platelet accumulation 48 h after APAP overdose (Fig. 7F).

Collectively, these results indicate that blocking VWF or the platelet integrin receptor αIIbβ3, even during development of injury, reduces hepatic platelet accumulation and promotes liver repair after APAP overdose in mice.

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

Accumulating evidence from experimental and clinical studies suggests that the hemostatic system contributes to the progression of acute liver injury.2–5

We have previously observed that platelets accumulate in the APAP-injured liver and contribute to acute liver injury in mice,3 and patients with ALF who received platelet transfusions have a worse outcome than those who do not.5

Furthermore, patients with ALF have an imbalance between VWF and its cleaving protease ADAMTS13, which is associated with poor outcome.2

Here, we provide the first direct mechanistic evidence linking VWF to the progression of ALF.

Specifically, we discovered that although VWF does not contribute to initial APAP hepatotoxicity, VWF substantially delays repair of the injured liver.

Moreover, our studies provide mechanistic insight into VWF regulation after APAP overdose and document the potential of VWF inhibition as a potential approach to stimulate liver repair.

PARAGRAPH

We observed a reduction in plasma HMW VWF multimers and VWF antigen levels 24 h after APAP challenge, which was coupled to deposition of VWF within the APAP-injured liver.

In agreement with the loss of the most active VWF (i.e. HMW multimers) from plasma, we found that the ability of plasma VWF to bind to collagen was significantly reduced 24 h after APAP challenge.

Taken together, these results suggest that the HMW multimers in plasma might be deposited in the liver after APAP overdose.

Interestingly, a small study showed intense VWF deposits in areas of necrosis in liver fragments from patients with ALF,34 similar to our observations in mice.

In mice, VWF levels recovered to higher than normal plasma levels 48 h and 72 h after APAP challenge, but the relative proportion of HMW multimers was reduced at these times, consistent with the reduced proportion of HMW multimers seen in patients with ALF.2

VWF:CB was increased at later times after APAP overdose, in line with the observed increase in VWF plasma levels.

However, VWF activity did not increase to the same extent as antigen, indicated by a reduced VWF:CB/VWF:Ag ratio, another observation consistent with observations in patients with ALF.2

In patients, this change could be due to administration of N-acetyl cysteine, which is routinely given to APAP overdose patients and has been shown to reduce VWF multimer size.35,36

The reduction in HMW VWF multimers could also be driven by cleavage of VWF by other proteases such as plasmin.37

Our observation that deposition of VWF in the injured liver coincides with a reduced proportion of HMW VWF multimers in plasma suggests an additional possible explanation for the relative loss of highly active VWF from the plasma after APAP overdose.

PARAGRAPH

The mechanisms controlling elevated VWF levels in APAP-challenged mice and in patients with ALF are not fully understood, but could be attributed to endothelial cell activation,38,39 increased hepatic expression38,39 and/or reduced clearance.2,16

We observed a small increase in Vwf hepatic mRNA expression, suggesting that VWF is not over synthesized by liver endothelial cells after APAP overdose.

Neubauer et al. also reported minimal change in VWF gene expression in liver fragments collected from patients with ALF.34

These results suggest that increased hepatic VWF expression cannot fully explain the increased plasma levels after APAP overdose.

Endothelial cell activation could also lead to increased VWF plasma levels by releasing VWF stored in Weibel-Palade bodies.

It is possible that hepatic and non-hepatic sources contribute to release of VWF after APAP overdose in response either to extrahepatic APAP metabolism or to acute phase mediators.

Impaired hepatic VWF clearance by the injured liver may also lead to increased VWF plasma levels.

Hepatocytes and Kupffer cells play an important role in clearing VWF,26,40 and thus, hepatocellular injury and liver macrophage dysfunction41 following APAP overdose is speculated to affect VWF clearance.

Indeed, we demonstrate here that APAP overdose causes delayed VWF clearance, evidenced by prolonged MRT of infused VWF in APAP-challenged Vwf−/− mice compared with saline-challenged Vwf−/− mice.

Defining how impaired VWF clearance links with increased VWF expression, and release from various cellular sources, to cause elevated VWF levels after APAP overdose requires further study.

PARAGRAPH

A prior study demonstrated that platelet depletion significantly reduced liver injury after APAP overdose.3

Thus, one mechanism whereby VWF deficiency could protect from APAP-induced liver injury is by reducing hepatic platelet accumulation.

However, we found that VWF deficiency had no significant effect on early hepatic platelet accumulation or necrosis (i.e. 24 h after APAP).

Interestingly, this suggests that the transient increase in hepatocyte proliferation in APAP-challenged Vwf−/− mice is driven by a platelet-independent mechanism.

Moreover, these studies suggest the mechanisms driving initial platelet accumulation in the APAP-injured liver are VWF-independent, perhaps including engagement of platelets by other components of the extracellular matrix (e.g., fibrin(ogen), fibronectin) or other soluble platelet activators (e.g., thrombin).

However, despite the important role of VWF in shielding factor VIII from proteolytic inactivation, coagulation activation and hepatic fibrin(ogen) deposition were not affected by VWF deficiency.

Overall, it appears that VWF is not a component of the mechanism driving the initial intrahepatic accumulation of platelets in the APAP-injured liver.

Additional studies are required to define the mechanisms linking VWF and hepatocyte proliferation in the early phase of APAP-induced liver injury.

PARAGRAPH

Although early platelet accumulation after APAP overdose was independent of VWF, we noted that hepatic platelet accumulation was nearly absent in Vwf−/− mice 48 h after APAP challenge.

This result suggests that VWF could stabilize platelet aggregates in the injured liver and that this interaction impedes liver repair after APAP overdose.

Indeed, a previous study found that VWF is required to form stable, occlusive thrombi in injured vessels,42 and hepatic platelet-induced microthrombi formation by inadequate regulation of VWF activity has been proposed to drive disease progression.2

We present multiple lines of evidence linking VWF-platelet aggregate formation to inhibition of the APAP-injured liver.

Faster removal of platelet aggregates in the Vwf−/− mice after APAP overdose is consistent with unstable thrombi formed in the absence of VWF.

Restoration of plasma VWF in Vwf−/− mice after APAP overdose returned hepatic platelet-VWF aggregates 48 h after APAP challenge, and this was coupled to a reduction in liver repair.

Consistent with these results, antibody-mediated inhibition of VWF or inhibition of the platelet integrin αIIbβ3 in APAP-challenged mice, even after the development of early hepatotoxicity, reduced hepatic platelet accumulation and accelerated liver repair 48 h after APAP challenge.

Although we cannot exclude a role for VWF in secondary accumulation of platelets in the injured liver, we observed that after the initial hepatic influx (~6 h after APAP overdose), blood platelet counts are relatively stable out to 36 h (data not shown).

Overall, the results suggest that VWF-stabilized platelet thrombi in the diseased liver might delay liver repair, and provide the proof-of-concept that a VWF-targeted therapy with low bleeding risk43 could improve repair of the injured liver.

Future studies defining the precise mechanisms whereby VWF-platelet aggregates inhibit liver repair may identify additional therapeutic targets.

PARAGRAPH

In summary, we identified that acute liver damage in mice caused deposition of VWF and platelets in the injured liver.

This was followed by a persistent elevation in VWF plasma levels, changes consistent with observations in patients with ALF.

Despite identical peak liver injury, liver repair was dramatically accelerated in Vwf−/− mice in association with reduced platelet aggregates in the liver microvasculature.

Conversely, restoration of VWF deposits in Vwf−/− mice dramatically increased hepatic platelet accumulation.

Analogous to Vwf−/− mice, administration of a VWF blocking antibody or a platelet-specific integrin antagonist significantly reduced hepatic platelet aggregates and accelerated liver repair in mice with established APAP-induced hepatotoxicity.

The results suggest a connection between hepatic VWF-platelet aggregate formation and impaired liver repair after APAP overdose.

These studies are the first to provide a mechanistic link between VWF and liver repair, suggesting an explanation for the clinical observations regarding VWF in patients with ALF.

SECTION

Abbreviations

PARAGRAPH

ALF, acute liver failure; ALT, alanine aminotransferase; APAP, acetaminophen; EHA, European Hematology Association; HMW, high molecular weight; LMW, low molecular weight; MRT, mean residence time; NIH, National Institutes of Health; NPP, normal pooled mouse plasma; PCNA, proliferating cell nuclear antigen; SNK, Student-Newman-Keuls; TAT, thrombin anti-thrombin; VWF, von Willebrand factor; WT, wild-type.

SECTION

Financial support

PARAGRAPH

This research was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health (NIH) to JPL (R01 DK105099, DK120289), T32 GM092715, John A. Penner Endowed Research Assistantship to KSB, support from the USDA National Institute of Food and Agriculture, and an EHA Research Grant from the European Hematology Association (EHA) to DG.

The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the NIDDK or the NIH.

SECTION

Conflict of interest

PARAGRAPH

The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.

PARAGRAPH

Please refer to the accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.

SECTION

Authors’ contributions

PARAGRAPH

Designed and conducted experiments: DG, HCF, KSB, KM, JSP, JPL.

Analyzed data: DG, KSB, JSP, JPL.

Interpreted the data: DG, KJW, RAR, TL, JSP, JPL.

Drafted initial sections of the manuscript: DG.

Approved final version of the manuscript: DG, HCF, KSB, KJW, RAR, KM, TL, JSP, JPL