10.1016/j.jhep.2018.04.009

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Lysyl oxidase-like protein 2 (LOXL2) modulates barrier function in cholangiocytes in cholestasis

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Bile ducts play a pivotal and active role in bile formation and excretion.1–4

Bile duct integrity is therefore a prerequisite for normal liver function.5

Normal bile duct secretory function critically depends on regular epithelial barrier function including selective permeability for specific molecules.5

This requires numerous specific proteins forming a tightly regulated tight junction protein complex between bile duct epithelial cells (BECs).6

Cholangiopathies are frequently associated with alterations of BECs’ tight junctions.5,7,8

Numerous exogenous and endogenous toxins, cytokines and chemokines, and pathogens may negatively impact on tight junction function studied primarily in vitro and in animal models (e.g. lithocholic acid [LCA]-fed mice, Mdr2−/− mice, alpha-naphthylisothiocyanate).9–11

Increasing evidence from mouse models suggests that impaired tight junction integrity may play an important role in the pathogenesis of cholangiopathies and cholestasis: (i) E-cadherin (Cdh1−/−) knockout mice spontaneously develop sclerosing cholangitis,12 (ii) α-catenin (Ctnna1−/−) knockout mice develop cholestasis with reduced bile flow and increased susceptibility to cholic acid feeding injury,13 and (iii) claudin-2 deficiency in mice significantly reduced bile flow.14

Consequently, altered bile composition could alter tight junction structure and function9,10,15,16 and conversely, tight junction alterations may affect bile formation and render bile ducts more susceptible to cholangitis.5,13,14,12,17,18

PARAGRAPH

Lysyl oxidases (LOX) comprise a family of secreted copper-dependent amine oxidases with five isoforms, including the prototype lysyl oxidase and lysyl oxidase-like (LOXL) proteins (LOXL1-4), which mediate the covalent molecular cross-linking of collagens and elastin through oxidative deamination of peptidyl lysine.19,20

LOXL proteins may be of key relevance in tissue homeostasis as LOXL-mediated cross-linking has been shown to significantly affect extracellular matrix stability in the liver.21

LOXL family mRNA expression is significantly induced in animal models such as bile duct ligated rats, Abcb4−/− mice as a preclinical primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) model22,23 and CCl4-intoxicated rats.24,25

In addition, specific LOXL2-inhibition has been recently shown to attenuate biliary liver fibrosis and to promote fibrosis reversal in thioacetamide-treated, BALB/c.

Mdr2−/− and diethoxycarbonyl-1,4-dihydrocollidine (DDC)-fed mice.25

In addition, a specific LOXL2-blocking antibody has been shown to ameliorate liver fibrosis in CCl4-challanged mice.26

Hepatocellular LOX and LOXL2 expression has been demonstrated in livers from patients with Wilson's disease and in some patients with primary biliary cholangitis (PBC),27 but evidence for LOXL2 involvement in human biliary-type liver fibrosis is limited.

PARAGRAPH

Specific LOX family isoforms, such as LOXL2, have been shown to participate in cancer progression via the induction of epithelial mesenchymal transition.

LOXL2 stabilizes the SNAIL1 protein through oxidative deamination, causing blockage of the GSK3-phosphorylation sites and E-cadherin repression resulting in increased cell mobility.26,28–30

This activity may also affect bile duct permeability in cholangiopathies.5,9,23,31–33

In certain cholangiopathies, concentric periductal fibrosis results in vascular deprivation of bile ducts and consequently to relative hypoxia of BECs, potentially inducing BEC senescence as recently demonstrated in PSC livers and Abcb4−/− mice.34

In addition, during cholestasis, bile acids accumulate in the liver and may also induce liver injury.35,36

It is not yet known whether stimuli of cellular senescence, reactive hypoxia, or bile constituents affect LOXL2 expression in BECs and whether this could be linked to the pathobiology of cholangitis and liver fibrosis of the biliary type.

Consequently, we hypothesized that increased portal LOXL2 expression promotes the development of bile duct leakiness and biliary type of liver fibrosis in cholangiopathies.5,9,32,33

PARAGRAPH

We therefore aimed to test the hypothesis that triggers of cellular senescence, hypoxia and bile constituents, all potentially engaged in the pathogenesis of cholangiopathies37 induce LOXL2 expression and alter bile duct permeability.

Moreover, we aimed to study hepatic LOXL2 expression patterns and LOXL2 serum levels in patients with PSC, secondary SC, and PBC in comparison to disease controls and to establish a detailed time course of LOXL2 expression and localization in four different well-characterized animal models of cholangiopathies.

Finally, we determined the cellular source of LOXL2 expression in human cholangiopathies and mouse models via in situ hybridization.

Our combined translational studies revealed novel mechanistic insights into the potential role of LOXL2 protein in cholangiopathies.

SECTION

Material and methods

SECTION

Animals

PARAGRAPH

Male Abcb4 knockout and Abcb4 wild-type mice (FVB/N background) were housed with a 12 h light-dark cycle and permitted consumption of water and a standard mouse chow (Sniff, Soest, Germany) ad libitum.

Toxin-induced cholangiopathy was induced in two-month-old male Swiss Albino mice weighing 25 to 30 g via feeding a 1% LCA-supplemented diet for four to seven days and via feeding a 0.1% DDC-supplemented diet for four and eight weeks.17,28

Common bile duct ligation (CBDL, for seven days, four weeks, eight weeks) and mouse harvesting were performed as described elsewhere.6

Livers from each mouse (n = 5 in each group) were excised after cervical dislocation under general anesthesia with isoflurane.

The experimental protocols where approved by the local animal Care and Use Committees (BMWF-66.010/0045-II/10b/2010).

SECTION

Human liver tissue

PARAGRAPH

Liver explants from patients with PSC (n = 15, provided by the Norwegian PSC Research Center, Division of Surgery, Inflammatory diseases and Transplantation, Oslo University Hospital Rikshospitalet) or PBC (n = 5), or biopsies from disease-control liver tissue.

The disease-control cohort comprised alcoholic steatohepatitis (ASH, n = 9), autoimmune hepatitis (AIH, n = 3), and chronic viral hepatitis C (CHC, n = 4).

Patients had given their full informed consent for this study, and the experimental protocol was approved by the local Ethics Committees (ethics approval IDs: S-08872b and S-08329 a) in accordance with the ethical guidelines of the 1975 Declaration of Helsinki.

SECTION

Measurement of plasma LOXL2

PARAGRAPH

Serum LOXL2 levels were measured in 109 patients with PBC, 13 with PSC, 11 with secondary SC and 50 healthy controls.

Patients were diagnosed according to the current European Association for the Study of the Liver guidelines for cholestatic liver diseases.31

All subjects were fully consented according to the Medical University Graz approved procedures.

Testing for LOXL2 was performed at Gilead Sciences (Foster City, CA 94404, US) using a LOXL2 immunoassay previously described30 and a fully-automatized two-step sandwich immunoassay (RUO VIDAS® LOXL2 immunoassay) developed at bioMérieux (Marcy L’Etoile, France).

SECTION

Biliary epithelial cells in vitro studies

PARAGRAPH

Murine immortalized BECs (a kind gift from Dr. Ueno, Department of Internal Medicine, Tohoku University, Japan) were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium containing 10% fetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin-streptomycin, and cells were kept at 37 °C in a 5% CO2 atmosphere.

Cells were grown to approximately 80–90% confluence and after 24–36 h, the medium was removed and the cells were treated with reagents as described (Table S1).

Relative hypoxia was modelled by culturing BECs in 5% and 1% O2 at 37 °C.

BECs were incubated with 50 and 100 sodium-chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA) for up to 48 h.

We also compared the effects of bile from Abcb4−/− without biliary phospholipid secretion and WT mice.

Therefore, bile was collected after laparotomy, CBDL, and cannulation of the gall bladder as described10 and diluted to achieve a final concentration of 1.5 mM bile acids.

Importantly, the absolute concentrations of bile acids in bile from Abcb4−/− do not significantly differ from WT controls.23,38

PARAGRAPH

To determine the effects of pharmacological LOX-inhibition and LOXL2 knockdown, BECs were treated with 150 µM D-penicillamine (D-Pen) plus 150 µM bathocuproinedisulfonic acid (BCS)39–41 or transfected with LOXL2 siRNA and scramble controls (for details see Supplementary Material), prior to challenge with herein identified LOXL2 triggers.

SECTION

Statistical analysis

PARAGRAPH

Statistical analyses included Student’s t test when appropriate or univariate analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Bonferroni post hoc testing when more than two groups were compared, using the IBM SPSS 23.0 statistical package (SPSS Inc, Chicago).

A p value <0.05 was considered significant.

PARAGRAPH

For further details regarding the materials and methods used, please refer to the CTAT table and supplementary information.

SECTION

Results

SECTION

Triggers of cellular senescence, hypoxia, Abcb4−/− bile and CDCA induce LOXL2 and SNAIL1 expression and repress E-cadherin expression in cultured BECs

PARAGRAPH

Since senescence of BECs was recently demonstrated in Abcb4−/− mice and PSC livers,34 we tested whether triol or hydroxycholesterol treatment of BECs induce LOXL2 expression in vitro as part of a senescence associated secretory phenotype (SASP) [Supplementary Ref. 1].

Treatment for 48 h induced positive β-galactosidase staining, indicating cellular senescence (Fig. 1A).

Cell viability was more than 70% under all treatments (Fig. S1A).

We observed significant induction of the SASP markers Il6, Cxcl1 and p16 (Cdkn2a) as well as Loxl2 mRNA in cultured BECs treated with senescence triggers compared to BECs under standard conditions after 48 h of treatment (3.7-fold increase in triol- and TGF-β1-treated and 2.5-fold increase in hydroxycholesterol-treated BECs, p <0.001; Fig. 1B).

ELISA for IL-6 revealed a significant induction in BECs treated with senescence triggers compared to BECs under standard conditions after 48 h of treatment (3-fold increase in triol-, 4.5-fold increase in TGF-β1-treated and 3.2-fold increase in hydroxycholesterol-treated BECs, p <0.001; Fig. 1C).

In addition, E-cadherin mRNA expression was significantly repressed in BECs treated with senescence triggers and TGF-β1 (90% decrease in TGFβ1-treated and 47% and 44% decrease in triol- and hydroxycholesterol-treated BECs, p <0.001, Fig. 1B).

Membrane protein content for E-cadherin was significantly reduced by SASP-inducing agents as indicated by western blot and immunofluorescence (IF) findings (Fig. 1D–E).

This was paralleled by induction of cytoplasmic and nuclear SNAIL1 protein expression in BECs with SASP, whereas control BECs showed virtually no SNAIL1-expression (Fig. 1F).

PARAGRAPH

To assess the localization of an additional tight junction protein, IF staining for ZO-1 was performed in cultured BECs treated with senescence triggers, and compared to BECs under standard conditions after 48 h of treatment (Fig. S2).

TGF-β1-treatment caused a re-organization of ZO-1 protein from the cellular membrane to the cytoplasm.

In CDCA-treated BECs, focal loss of membranous ZO-1 staining was seen, whereas membranous ZO-1 was detected in triol-treated and BECs under standard conditions (Fig. S2).

Compared to the profound repression of E-cadherin expression, changes in ZO-1 expression were less pronounced in our in vitro model.

However, we conclude from these results that the observed changes might not be exclusively for the tight junction protein E-cadherin which needs to be studied in more detail in the future.

PARAGRAPH

Since progressive periductal fibrosis SC may lead to relative hypoxia of BECs [Supplementary Ref. 3] we next tested the effects of hypoxic conditions on LOXL2, SNAIL1, and E-cadherin expression.

Hypoxia (5% and 1% O2) exposure for up to 48 h significantly increased hypoxia-inducible factor-1 alpha (HIF-1α, as positive control) in BECs (Fig. 2A).

Cell viability assays showed cell survival of >70% (Fig. S1B).

Hypoxic conditions significantly increased Loxl2 mRNA (Fig. 2B, upper panel), whereas levels of E-cadherin mRNA were significantly repressed (45% decrease in BECs under 5% oxygen after 12 and 24 h and ∼60% decrease after 48 h, p <0.001; 40% decrease in BECs under 1% oxygen after 12 and 24 h and 60% decrease after 48 h, p <0.001, Fig. 2B, lower panel).

Western blot and IF results showed reciprocal regulation of E-cadherin, SNAIL1, and LOXL2 expression in BECs under hypoxic conditions (Fig. 2C–2E).

PARAGRAPH

We next compared in vitro the effects of bile collected from Abcb4−/− and WT mice to test the hypothesis that increased amounts of non-micellar bound bile acids in bile from Abcb4−/− mice affects BECs’ LOXL2, SNAIL1, and E-cadherin expression.

Interestingly, treating BECs with bile resulted in increased cell viability (Fig. S1D), which may be primarily related to the significantly increased cell proliferation rate (Fig. S1F).

Challenge with Abcb4−/− bile, however, induced VCAM-1 expression, a marker for reactive cholangiocytes in mouse models of sclerosing cholangitis [Supplementary Ref. 4], in BECs (Fig. 3A).

Interestingly, only Abcb4−/− bile induced LOXL2 and SNAIL1 expression and reciprocally repressed E-cadherin expression (Fig. 3B, C).

PARAGRAPH

Since we hypothesized that free non-micellar bound bile acids in Abcb4−/− bile represent the main trigger for the demonstrated LOXL2 and SNAIL1 expression with E-cadherin repression, we next tested the effects of increasing doses of CDCA.

Cell viability assays showed survival of >90% of BECs treated with 50 and 100 µM CDCA (Fig. S1C).

CDCA treatment caused a marked increase of LOXL2/SNAIL1 expression and a concomitant repression of E-cadherin expression in BECs at the mRNA and protein level compared to BECs under standard conditions (Fig. 3D–F).

SECTION

Pharmacological inhibition of LOX activity rescues E-cadherin expression and barrier function of stressed BECs

PARAGRAPH

To address whether the observed E-cadherin repression in stressed BECs is mechanistically linked to LOXL2 induction, we treated BECs with BCS and D-pen to chemically inhibit LOX activity following challenge with TGF-β1, triol and CDCA, respectively (Fig. 4A, B).

Cell viability was >85% in BECs treated with BCS and D-pen (Fig. S1E).

Inhibition of LOX activity significantly repressed LOXL2 expression in BECs (Fig. 4A–C).

Repression of LOXL2 expression led to restoration of E-cadherin expression as indicated by IF and western blot findings (Fig. 4A–C).

In addition, LOXL2 knockdown via LOXL2-siRNA treatment significantly repressed LOXL2 production of TGF-β1- and CDCA-challenged BECs and restored E-cadherin expression (Fig. 4E–F).

These findings indicate that LOXL2 mediates E-cadherin repression in this in vitro model.

PARAGRAPH

To test the functional implications of LOXL2 repression, we next compared TEER in BECs challenged with TGF-β1, triol and CDCA.

All stimuli significantly reduced TEER in BECs 48 h after treatment (eleven percent reduction in TGF-β1-treated, twenty percent reduction in triol- and twenty-seven percent reduction in CDCA-treated BECs, p <0.001, Fig. 4D).

Chemical LOX-inhibition with BCS/D-pen in BECs treated with TGF-β1, triol and CDCA significantly increased TEER 48 h after treatment compared to BECs treated with the stimuli alone (Fig. 4D).

These data suggest that the SASP used and CDCA drive LOXL2 but reciprocally repress E-cadherin expression and consequently lead to reduced TEER in BECs, which can be recovered via chemical LOX-inhibition.

SECTION

LOXL2 expression is significantly induced in PSC livers

PARAGRAPH

In PSC livers, immunohistochemistry (IHC) analyses showed LOXL2 expression in a clear association with fibrotic septa (Fig. 5A, left, indicated by asterisk), portal tracts, and ductular reaction (Fig. 5A, middle and right) with 80% LOXL2-positive fibrotic septa in 12/15 of PSC cases (Table S5).

Notably, LOXL2 expression was detected in the portal fields in 11/15 patients with PSC (73%).

In addition, LOXL2 was found in the hepatic lobule with up to ten positive lobular foci in 8/15 (53%) patients with PSC.

Intriguingly, LOXL2 showed a clear association with characteristic periductal onion skin-type fibrosis (Fig. 5A, middle).

In order to study LOXL2 localization in its relationship with BECs in patients with PSC, IF double labelling for LOXL2 and keratin 19 (K19) was performed (Fig. 5B).

LOXL2 expression was observed around bile ducts and in regions of ductular reaction, occasionally also showing clear co-localization of LOXL2 and K19 within BECs (Fig. 5B, middle and right).

In order to study LOXL2 localization and its relation to E-cadherin expression in PSC livers, we performed IF double labelling for LOXL2 and E-cadherin (Fig. 5C).

Most importantly, we frequently observed a loss of E-cadherin expression in medium-sized bile ducts with induced BECs’ LOXL2-overexpression (Fig. 5C).

PARAGRAPH

To specify the cellular source for hepatic LOXL2 production in PSC, we performed in situ hybridization (Fig. 5D).

In the portal tract, BECs of small and medium-sized bile ducts as well as bile duct proliferates, endothelial cells of small vessels and portal myofibroblasts represented the main sources of Loxl2 mRNA production (Fig. 5D, upper and middle).

In the liver lobule, Loxl2 mRNA was primarily detectable in KCs characterized by their typical triangular cell shape (Fig. 5, lower left).

In disease controls, LOXL2 expression was associated with fibrotic septa in the majority of patients (3/3 AIH, 3/3 PBC, 6/9 ASH, 4/4 CHC and 2/2 ASH; Table S5, Fig. S5).

Compared to PSC livers, LOXL2 protein was found in the hepatic lobule of disease controls, and was especially frequent in patients with AIH, ASH, and CHC with more than ten positive lobular foci in 17/21 (81%) livers of those patients.

In contrast, portal LOXL2 expression was rarely seen in disease-control livers (see detailed results in Table S5).

Thus, in the studied entities, several cell species contribute to induced hepatic LOXL2 expression with a predominance of LOXL2-producing cells within the portal tract especially portal myofibroblasts and of specific interest in BECs.

PARAGRAPH

To test whether LOXL2 serum levels may serve as a potential biomarker for cholangiopathies, serum protein levels were determined in patients with PSC and compared to controls.

Patient characteristics are summarized (Table S6).

Notably, LOXL2 serum levels were significantly higher in patients with PSC than in control patients (271 ± 139 pg/ml in PSC vs. 98 ± 25 pg/ml in control patients, p <0.001).

SECTION

LOXL2 expression is significantly induced in preclinical models of cholangiopathies

PARAGRAPH

In four- and eight-week-old Abcb4−/− mice, Loxl2 mRNA and LOXL2 protein expression was significantly increased compared to WT controls (Fig. S3A, S3C).

IHC analysis of eight-week-old Abcb4−/− mouse livers revealed a predominant portal and periportal LOXL2 staining pattern (Fig. S3B, lower left), while LOXL2 staining was virtually absent in WT mouse livers (Fig. S3B, upper left).

IF double labelling for K19 and LOXL2 revealed a regional concentration of LOXL2 to the portal region (Fig. S3B, lower middle) and fibrotic septa and confirmed the absence of specific LOXL2 signal in WT mice (Fig. S3B, upper middle).

It is important to note that IF double labelling for E-cadherin and LOXL2 showed LOXL2-overexpression and concomitant loss of E-cadherin in bile ducts of Abcb4−/− mice (Fig. S3B, lower right) mirroring our in vitro results.

In contrast, WT mouse livers showed a distinct membranous E-cadherin-staining pattern (Fig. S3B, upper right).

Abcb4−/− mouse livers showed significantly induced LOXL2 protein levels (Fig. S3C).

In Abcb4−/− mice, cholangiocytes and portal myofibroblasts represented the main sources of Loxl2 mRNA production (Fig. S3D, middle and lower panel).

In the liver lobules, Loxl2 mRNA was primarily detected in Kupffer cells (KCs) characterized by typical triangular cell shape (Fig. S3D, lower right, indicated by black circles).

Although several cell species including KCs may contribute to induced hepatic Loxl2 expression in Abcb4−/− mice, the predominant proportion of LOXL2 protein is primarily produced from cells in the portal field namely cholangiocytes and portal myofibroblasts.

PARAGRAPH

In seven-day LCA-fed mice, Loxl2 mRNA expression was significantly increased compared to controls (Fig. S4A).

IHC revealed a predominant portal and periductal LOXL2 expression pattern (Fig. S3B, left panel).

The highest expression of LOXL2 was again seen in and around bile ducts (Fig. S4B, right panel).

CBDL induced a significant increase in Loxl2 mRNA after three days, with a peak level at seven days (p <0.001, Fig. S4C).

Interestingly, mRNA expression levels declined later and remained at comparable levels after three and eight weeks of CBDL (Fig. S4C), which was paralleled by hepatic LOXL2 protein expression (Fig. S4D).

In addition, LOXL2 protein was localized to regions of bile infarcts.

These regions presumably contain the highest intrahepatic bile acid concentrations and are also subject to increased intrahepatic shear forces in CBDL mice, since these regions represent lobular areas with blown out bile into the parenchyma due to disrupted cholangioles (Fig. S4D, lower left, indicated by asterisk).

Sham-operated controls showed low Loxl2 mRNA and virtually absent protein expression (Fig. S4C and D, upper panel).

PARAGRAPH

DDC-feeding significantly increased Loxl2 mRNA expression at each time point studied with a peak at week four (11.6-fold in DDC-fed mice; p <0.001, Fig. S4E).

There was a predominant portal and periductular expression pattern together with pronounced LOXL2 expression along porto-portal septa comparable to the other models studied (Fig. S4F).

PARAGRAPH

Our findings in four prototypic mouse models for cholangiopathies collectively show that LOXL2 expression is significantly induced in portal fields and along porto-portal septa.

The close proximity of LOXL2 protein to bile ducts and bile ductules points to a central role for LOXL2 in cholangiopathies and biliary type of liver fibrosis [Supplementary Ref. 5].

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

LOXL2 is a member of the LOX family and has been linked to fibrosis, pro-oncogenic angiogenesis, chemotaxis, and cancer progression [Supplementary Ref. 6].

The combined results of our in vitro experiments identify various potential candidate molecules as inducers of BECs’ LOXL2 expression and indicate that LOXL2 negatively regulates BECs’ barrier function.

In addition, we herein have identified BECs, KCs, and hepatic stellate cells and myofibroblasts as important sources of LOXL2 production in four different mouse models of sclerosing cholangitis and most importantly also in human PSC, representing a prototypic member of the heterogeneous group of cholangiopathies.

Consequently, the data provided in the current study should stimulate conceptual thinking on the role of LOXL2 in cholangiopathies.

PARAGRAPH

We found LOXL2 protein primarily localized to the portal fields and porto-portal septa in human cholangiopathies and in four different mouse models (Fig. 5, Figs. S3 and S4).

It should be noted, however, that BECs, in addition to KCs and myofibroblasts/hepatic stellate cells, represent important sources of LOXL2 production in cholangiopathies, since this may have a critical impact on their pivotal barrier function against the aggressive biliary/luminal content that creates a very inhospitable environment for these highly specialized liver cells.37

LOXL2 was previously shown to regulate tight junction function via SNAIL1-mediated repression of E-cadherin30 [Supplementary Refs. 6,7] and also cell mobility.30

The tight junction function of BECs was recently shown to be critical for bile duct integrity, as liver-specific E-cadherin knockout mice develop spontaneous periportal inflammation as well as periductal fibrosis which resembles PSC.12

Our current data imply that the observed LOXL2 induction in BEC’s mirrored by E-cadherin repression may be instrumental for altered bile duct permeability and ductular reaction in cholangiopathies.

There may be two reasons for this: (i) LOXL2-mediated E-cadherin repression may render the inflamed/injured bile duct more vulnerable, and (ii) BEC-derived LOXL2 expression may drive an autocrine loop for ductular reaction and consequently biliary liver fibrosis.

The latter concept is further supported by recent data by Ikenga et al., showing decreased ductular reaction after therapeutic LOXL2-blocking in thioacetamide-induced, Abcb4−/− and DDC-fed mice.25

PARAGRAPH

The potential triggers for LOXL2 induction in BECs identified herein raise some intriguing questions.

The interesting concept of a BECs’ SASP in cholangiopathies was recently brought forward elegantly by Nick LaRusso’s group using Abcb4−/− mice as well as PSC livers.34

Therefore, we first tested known SASP triggers in vitro showing LOXL2 induction together with E-cadherin repression.

Concomitant LOXL2 induction and E-cadherin repression may in turn represent an important aspect of the BECs’ SASP phenotype.

Since bile from Abcb4−/− mice, LCA in vivo, and CDCA-challenge in vitro collectively led to comparable effects, it is reasonable to conclude that bile and certain potentially toxic bile acids can induce LOXL2/SNAIL1 induction together with E-cadherin repression in cholangiopathies.

Finally, we show that relative hypoxia could cause this phenomenon, which is significant, since the Achilles’ heel for oxygen supply for BECs is the periductal capillary plexus, which may be displaced in progressive periductal onion skin-type like fibrosis.

PARAGRAPH

Our findings go some way to support testing of anti-LOXL2 strategies for their potential therapeutic effects in PSC.

However, potential negative consequences from interference with LOXL2 biology should be considered.

Periductal fibrosis could be involved to some extent in the wound healing process of an injured bile duct.

Consequently, it is at least theoretically possible that anti-LOXL2 treatment in patients with PSC could provoke bile duct injury, though anti-LOXL2 antibody treatment has been shown to not affect wound healing in healthy tissues.26

In addition, potential effectiveness of anti-LOXL2 strategies may depend on disease stage in that early stages may benefit but late stages may not.

One may also consider combined therapeutic approaches, such as interfering with bile content by increasing biliary bicarbonate secretion together with reduction of potentially toxic bile acids (e.g. via polyhydroxylated or side-chain shortened bile acids) [Supplementary Ref. 8] or stimulation of phosphatidylcholine excretion (e.g. fibrates) in combination with pharmacological LOXL2-inhibition.

Due to its anti-fibrogenic and immunosuppressive effects a clinical trial using D-penicillamine for PSC was performed in 1988 and showed no beneficial effect on disease course or patient survival [Supplementary Ref. 9].

Apart from the potential therapeutic implications, our study also identified significantly increased LOXL2 serum levels in patients with cholangiopathies, which may potentially serve as a non-invasive biomarker used to stratify and monitor disease activity in PSC in the future [Supplementary Ref. 10].

Consequently, the significantly increased LOXL2 serum levels we saw in patients with cholangiopathies are of clinical interest, since there is an urgent need to identify biomarkers for monitoring non-invasive liver fibrosis and disease activity in PSC [Supplementary Ref. 11].

Future studies should shed more light on this interesting opportunity.

PARAGRAPH

Taken together, our findings suggest that LOXL2-mediated repression of E-cadherin in BECs may represent a relevant mechanism for bile duct injury in cholangiopathies.

It is tempting to speculate that these findings may also point towards a potential critical role of this mechanism for cholangiocarcinoma formation which deserves further attention, since such a phenomenon could increase cell mobility and could potentiate important mechanisms, such as epithelial mesenchymal transition in cholangiocarcinoma pathogenesis.

SECTION

Conflict of interest

PARAGRAPH

M.J.P.: Reports grants from Falk Foundation and Gilead Sciences Inc. to P.F during the conduct of the study.

S.R.: Reports grants from Falk Foundation and Gilead Sciences Inc. to P.F. during the conduct of the study.

A.M.V.: Current employee of Gilead Sciences, Inc.

Dr. Mikels-Vigdal reports personal fees from Gilead Sciences outside the submitted work.

In addition, Dr. Mikels-Vigdal has a patent 20150361182 issued.

D.M.: Former employee of Gilead Sciences, Inc.

C.B.: Reports grants and personal fees from Gilead Sciences Inc. during the conduct of the study; grants and personal fees from Intercept, grants from Tobira, grants and personal fees from BMS, grants from Cymabay outside the submitted work.

C.L.: Reports no conflict of interest.

T.M.: Reports no conflict of interest during the conduct of this study.

T.H.K.: Reports grants from Research Council of Norway outside the submitted work.

J.R.H.: Reports grants from Research Council of Norway outside the submitted work.

S.K.L.: Former employee of Gilead Sciences, Inc.

Dr. Lyman reports has a patent, Lysyl Oxidase-Like 2 Assay and Methods of Use thereof (US provisional patent application 61/492,210).

Victoria Smith, Joanne I. Adamkewicz, Susan K. Lyman, Jason Chien, Xiaoming Li, Lixin Shao, Jeffrey D. Bornstein.

pending.

J.A.: Former employee of Gilead Sciences, Inc.

Dr. Adamkewicz reports other from Gilead Sciences Inc, outside the submitted work.

In addition, Dr. Adamkewicz has a patent (WO2014070939A1) therapeutic and diagnostic methods related to lysyl oxidase-like 2 (loxl2) pending, and a patent (US20120309020A1) Lysyl oxidase-like 2 assay and methods of use thereof pending.

V.S.: Current employee of Gilead Sciences, Inc.

Dr. Smith reports personal fees from Gilead Sciences outside the submitted work.

In addition, Dr. Smith has a patent Lysyl Oxidase-Like 2 Assay and Methods of Use Thereof.

(US provisional patent application 61/492,210).

Victoria Smith, Joanne I. Adamkewicz, Susan K. Lyman, Jason Chien, Xiaoming Li, Lixin Shao, Jeffrey D. Bornstein.

pending.

E.M.: Reports other from bioMérieux, during the conduct of the study.

G.Z.: Reports grants from Falk Foundation and Gilead Sciences Inc. to P.F during the conduct of the study.

T.J.E.: Reports no conflict of interest during the conduct of this study.

T.S.: Reports no conflict of interest during the conduct of this study.

H.S.: Reports no conflict of interest during the conduct of this study.

H.P.G.: Reports no conflict of interest during the conduct of this study.

R.E.S.: Reports grants, personal fees and other from Gilead Sciences Inc. during the conduct of the study.

M.T.: Speaker for Falk Foundation; advisory boards for Dr. Falk Pharma GmbH, Albireo, Gilead Sciences Inc, Intercept, Novartis; travel grants from Falk Foundation, Gilead Sciences Inc. and unrestricted research grants from Gilead Sciences Inc, Dr. Falk Pharma GmbH, Albireo and Intercept.

P.F.: Speaker for Falk Foundation, advisory boards for Dr. Falk Pharma GmBH and Intercept; travel grants and unrestricted research grants from Falk Foundation and unrestricted research grant from Gilead Sciences Inc.

PARAGRAPH

Please refer to the accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.

SECTION

Authors’ contributions

PARAGRAPH

MJP, SR, AMV, DM, SKL and JA were responsible for experimental setup, measurements, analysis of data, interpretation of data, MJP and PF were responsible for manuscript writing; AMV, DM, CB, CL, TM, THK, JRV, SKL, JA, VS, MT, TS, HS, HJG and GZ helped with study design, interpretation of data and drafting of the manuscript; MJP and CL were responsible for histological evaluation of liver samples; EM was responsible for analysis of serum samples; TS, GZ, HS, HJG and RES were responsible for collection of patient liver and serum samples; PF was responsible for experimental setup, interpretation of data, drafting, reading and final approval of the manuscript.

All authors participated sufficiently in the presented work and approved the final version of the manuscript.