10.1016/j.jhep.2018.02.003

FULLTEXT

TITLE

O-GlcNAcylation of RACK1 promotes hepatocellular carcinogenesis

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the sixth-most frequent and the second-most lethal cancer worldwide, with a rising incidence in developing and industrialized countries.1

Until now, surgery has remained the most effective treatment with curative potential.

Nevertheless, most patients are still diagnosed at an advanced/late stage when surgery is no longer applicable, and display symptoms of intrahepatic and extrahepatic metastasis.2

Few effective treatment options exist for patients with advanced HCC, with a five-year survival rate of only 30%–40%.3

A high rate of postsurgical metastasis and relapse remains a major challenge in HCC, owing to the fact that this disease is highly resistant to conventional chemotherapy and radiation.4

Therefore, there is an urgent need to better understand the mechanisms contributing to the pathogenesis of HCC, to identify possible preventive strategies and therapeutic targets.

PARAGRAPH

Aberrant protein biosynthesis is a general feature during tumor transformation.5,6

Historically, increased cancer cell proliferation has been shown to require accelerated protein synthesis and ribosome biogenesis.7

Mutations that deregulate mRNA translation are also common events in human cancers.8

Recently, translation reprogramming is reported to be an evolutionarily conserved driver of phenotypic plasticity and therapeutic resistance in melanoma.9

Thus, deregulation of translation is regarded as an important step in tumorigenesis and cancer progression, directing both global control of protein synthesis and selective translation of specific mRNAs that promote tumor cell survival, angiogenesis, transformation, invasion and metastasis.5

Small molecules that target mRNA translation have shown anti-tumor effects in cell and mouse models.10,11

PARAGRAPH

O-linked β-N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) is a dynamic and inducible post-translational modification on serine and/or threonine residues of nuclear and cytosolic proteins.12

Catalyzed by O-GlcNAc-transferase (OGT) and removed by O-GlcNAcase (OGA), this dynamic modification is dependent on environmental glucose concentration.12

O-linked β-N-acetylglucosaminylation (O-GlcNAcylation) regulates the activities of a wide panel of proteins involved in almost all aspects of cell biology.12,13

It also has become increasingly realized that O‑GlcNAcylation has important roles in cancer-relevant processes, such as cell signaling, transcription, epigenetics, metabolism and cytoskeletal regulation, while comprehension of the underlying mechanism remains at its beginnings.13

Interestingly, recent research indicates that O-GlcNAc cycling enzymes associate with translational machinery and modify ribosomal proteins.14,15

Nevertheless, little is currently known about the specific roles of aberrant O-GlcNAcylation in translational control of cancer cells.

PARAGRAPH

The receptor for activated C-kinase 1 (RACK1) is a member of the tryptophan–aspartate repeat (WD repeat) family of proteins.16

It has been identified as a classic scaffold protein for multiple kinases and receptors, and plays a pivotal role in a wide range of biologic responses.17

A previous study has shown that RACK1 is a component of the 40S ribosome subunit and present in both ribosome- and non-ribosome-bound form.17

The dysregulation of RACK1 is reported in several kinds of cancers, and has dramatic consequences on the regulation of key signaling pathways, and therefore on the development and progression of neoplastic diseases.18

Our previous study also revealed that ribosomal RACK1 promoted chemoresistance and growth in HCC.19

Nevertheless, how ribosomal RACK1 is regulated remains poorly understood.

Herein, we found that ribosomal RACK1 was highly O-GlcNAcylated at Ser122, and identified RACK1 as key mediator linking O-GlcNAc metabolism to cap-dependent translation during HCC tumorigenesis.

SECTION

Materials and methods

SECTION

Patient samples

PARAGRAPH

A total of 91 patients with HCC (75 primary cases, and 16 recurrent cases) resected between 2006 and 2012 in Zhongshan Hospital of Fudan University (Shanghai, China) were collected.

The diagnosis of HCC was confirmed by pathologic examination.

None of the 75 patients with primary HCC had received pre-operative therapy.

The group of 16 patients with first recurrence all received standard GEMOX chemotherapy for four to six cycles after initial diagnosis.

Staging data were according to the seventh edition of the AJCC Cancer Staging Manual.

All the patients' demographic characteristics, date of surgery, tumor stage, surgical and medical treatment methods, and other relevant data were extracted from hospital records.

Another independent group of 20 fresh HCC tissues and their peripheral non-tumor tissues were collected from patients with primary HCC in Nantong Tumor Hospital (Nantong University, Jiangsu, China).

The use of human tissue samples and clinical data was approved by the ethics committee of Fudan University.

All donors were informed of the aim of the study and gave consent to donate their samples.

SECTION

Generation of RACK1 S122A mutated mice

PARAGRAPH

The Rack1 gene has eight exons, with the ATG start codon in exon 1 and TAA stop codon in exon 8, and mutated site S122 was located within exon 3.

Briefly, RACK1 S122A knock-in mice were generated via homologous recombination.

The targeted vector composes of homologous arms, exon3 with mutant site (T>G) and a loxP flanked neomycin cassette.

The neomycin cassette served as the positive selection marker during the embryonic stem cell targeting step.

Then it was removed by expressing Cre via a plasmid in the targeted embryonic stem cells.

The pups were genotyped by PCR, followed by sequence analysis.

SECTION

Tumor xenograft models and Bioluminescent imaging

PARAGRAPH

Animal care and experiments were performed in strict accordance with the “Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals” prepared by the National Academy of Sciences and published by the National Institutes of Health, and all animal experiments were approved by the ethics committee of Fudan University.

BALB/C nude mice obtained from Shanghai Laboratory Animal Center of Chinese Academy Sciences were housed in a specific pathogen-free room at 25 °C with a 12 h dark/light cycle, fed regular chow, and were completely randomly grouped.

Power analysis was performed to determine the sample size before the experiment.

Mice died during the experiments were excluded from the final analysis.

For subcutaneous xenograft model, HuH7-luc cell suspension in PBS (5 * 106/mouse) was subcutaneously inoculated into the axillaries of six-week-old male BALB/c nude mice.

Mice were sacrificed at four weeks after implantation, and tumor xenografts were collected.

For orthotopic translation model, tumors from subcutaneous xenograft models were separated and chopped in PBS at 4 °C.

The diameter of each fragment was modified to 1 mm.

The fragments were then transplanted into the nude mice in the left lobes of the liver.

All mice were sacrificed at four weeks after implantation.

To study hematogenous metastasis, cell suspension in PBS (5 * 105/mouse) was injected intravenously into the lateral tail vein of six-week-old male BALB/c-nu/nu mice.

The mice were euthanized at five weeks after implantation, and their lungs and livers were fixed before photographing.

The number of metastatic nodules on the surface of lungs and livers was counted.

Bioluminescent imaging was performed with IVIS200 (Xenogen, Caliper, CA) 10 min after the intraperitoneal injection of luciferin (3 mg/mouse) (Promega, WI, USA).

The intensity of luciferase signals was quantified using ROI analysis.

The investigators were not blinded to the group allocation during the experiments.

SECTION

Diethylnitrosamine (DEN)-induced HCC and CT examination

PARAGRAPH

Animal care and experiments were performed in strict accordance with the “Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals” prepared by the National Academy of Sciences and published by the National Institutes of Health, and all animal experiments were approved by the ethics committee of Fudan University.

All mice were housed in a specific pathogen-free room at 25 °C with a 12 h dark/light cycle, and fed regular chow.

Power analysis was performed to determine the sample size before the experiment.

Mice died during the experiments were excluded from the final analysis.

Briefly, 15-day old male C57BL/6J or RACK1 S122A knock-in mice were intraperitoneally injected with a single dose of DEN (25 μg/g body weight).

Eight months later, all mice were sacrificed, and livers and lungs were excised.

The number of live surface nodules was counted, and maximum nodule volume was estimated by the formula [length (mm) × width (mm)2]/2.

Tumor mass was evaluated assuming a density of 1 g/cm3 according to a previous report.20

For the determination of hepatocellular carcinogenesis by computed tomography (CT) scan, another independent group of C57BL/6J mice was employed after a five-month induction of DEN.

Each mouse was injected with 100 μl CT contrast agent (ExiTron™ nano 6000, Miltenyi Biotec, Germany) via the lateral tail vein 10 min before CT examination (IVIS Spectrum CT, PerkinElmer, USA).

The investigators were not blinded to the group allocation during the experiments.

SECTION

Statistical analysis

PARAGRAPH

Power analysis was performed to determine the minimum sample size before the experiments.

Results are presented as means ± SD.

Student’s two-tailed t test was used for comparison between groups.

Categorical data were analyzed using the χ2 test.

Correlation of O-GlcNAcylated RACK1 with Cyclin D1, Survivin, Bcl-2, Snail, VEGF or GLUT1 expression was analyzed using nonparametric Spearman’s ρ test.

The optimal cut-off value for high or low expression of O-GlcNAcylated RACK1 was determined by ROC curve analysis.

For each statistical analysis, appropriate tests were selected based on whether the data was normally distributed and whether multiple comparisons were made.

Statistical significance was set at two-sided p <0.05.

All analysis was performed using SPSS 22.0 software (Chicago, IL, USA).

PARAGRAPH

For further details regarding the materials used, please refer to the CTAT table and supplementary information.

SECTION

Results

SECTION

Ribosomal RACK1 was highly O-GlcNAcylated at Serine 122

PARAGRAPH

To understand how ribosomal RACK1 was modulated, wild-type RACK1 and its non-ribosome binding mutant (R36D/K38E, DE mutant) were introduced into HuH7 and BEL-7404 cells.

Results indicated that the protein level of DE mutant was much lower than that of wild-type RACK1 (Fig. S1A).

The RACK1 DE mutant also exhibited shorter half-lives (Fig. S1B) and was more ubiquitinated (Fig. S1C) in both cells.

To investigate whether O-GlcNAc modification was involved in stabilization of the RACK1 protein, HCC cells were treated with ST078925 (OGT inhibitor) or thiamet-G (OGA inhibitor).

Administration of ST078925 markedly decreased RACK1 expression and promoted its degradation, while opposite effects were observed in thiamet-G treated cells (Fig. S2A–B and S2D–E).

Both inhibitors showed little influence on the mRNA content of Rack1 (Fig. S2C).

PARAGRAPH

Since ribosome binding and O-GlcNAc modification both influenced the RACK1 degradation, we next investigated the effects of ribosome binding on O-GlcNAcylation of RACK1.

Immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that wild-type RACK1 interacted with more OGT and exhibited higher level of O-GlcNAcylation, compared to the DE mutant (Fig. 1A and S2F).

Ribosome fractions were also isolated, and results confirmed that ribosome-associated RACK1 was strongly O-GlcNAcylated (Fig. 1B).

M7GDP affinity chromatography also indicated that OGT, as well as RACK1, associated with the eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4F (eIF4F) complex (Fig. 1C).

To map the site(s) for RACK1 O-GlcNAcylation, recombinant RACK1 was isolated, and DTT derivation followed by mass spectrometry analysis revealed the DTT-modified 119–125 peptide of RACK1 was observed at [M+2H]2+ m/z 881.3 (Fig. 1D and S2G).

Since two serine residues Ser122 and Ser124 were included within this peptide, point mutants were further generated.

Immunoprecipitation followed by blotting with O-GlcNAc specific antibody CTD110.6 indicated that a point mutation at Ser122, but not Ser124, specifically abolished RACK1 O-GlcNAcylation (Fig. 1E).

To further confirm this, we also performed affinity chromatography using the succinylated wheat germ agglutinin (sWGA) lectin, which primarily binds to N-acetylglucosamine residues on proteins.

Results demonstrated that the S122A, but not S124A mutant, failed to bind to the sWGA agarose (Fig. 1F).

Together, these data imply that ribosomal RACK1 is highly O-GlcNAcylated at Ser122.

SECTION

O-GlcNAcylation at Ser122 stabilizes RACK1 and enhances its association with translation initiation complex

PARAGRAPH

We next characterized the functional role of RACK1 O-GlcNAcylation at Ser122 in HCC cells.

It has been well established that O-GlcNAcylation often acts in a reciprocal manner to O-phosphate modifications of proteins.21

Nevertheless, we found that serine phosphorylation was not detected in wild-type RACK1 or S122A mutant in HCC cells (Fig. S3A).

PARAGRAPH

We next explored whether O-GlcNAcylation at Ser122 was involved in the modulation of RACK1 protein stability.

As shown (Fig. 2A), the exogenous protein level of S122A mutant were much lower than that of wild-type RACK1, and this phenomena was blocked by MG132, a cell-permeable inhibitor which suppresses the degradation of ubiquitinated proteins in the proteasome.

Cycloheximide (CHX) chase analysis revealed that the protein stability of exogenous RACK1 was impaired by S122A mutation (Fig. 2B).

The S122A mutant was also more ubiquitinated than wild-type RACK1 (Fig. S3B).

In addition, administration of thiamet-G dramatically suppressed the ubiquitination of wild-type RACK1, but showed little influence on S122A ubiquitination (Fig. 2C).

These data indicate that O-GlcNAcylation of RACK1 at Ser122 stabilizes RACK1 and prevents its ubiquitination.

PARAGRAPH

Since ribosomal RACK1 was highly and more O-GlcNAcylated (Fig. 1A and B), we hypothesized that O-GlcNAcylation at Ser122 might preferentially stabilize ribosomal RACK1.

Polysome profiling indicated that when Ser122 was mutated, the relative levels of exogenous RACK1 were markedly decreased in all ribosomal fractions by comparing with non-ribosomal RACK1 (Fig. 2D).

In addition, m7GDP affinity chromatography revealed that relative content of eIF4F-associated exogenous RACK1 (m7GDP precipitates vs. inputs) was significantly lower in S122A-transfected cells (Fig. 2E).

Similar results were also observed in oligo-dT pull-down assay (Fig. S3C).

Therefore, O-GlcNAcylation at Ser122 may preferentially stabilize ribosomal RACK1 and enhances its association with the translation initiation complex.

SECTION

RACK1 O-GlcNAcylation at Ser122 promotes its interaction with PKCβII

PARAGRAPH

Currently, PKCβII (PRKCB) is the only known signaling molecule with which RACK1 interacts on the ribosome, via WD repeats 3 and 6.22

It has been shown in both our study and other studies that PKCβII activity is required for RACK1-modulated translation initiation.19,23

Since Ser122 was located within the interface for RACK1/PKCβII association, we explored whether Ser122 O-GlcNAcylation of RACK1 could modulate its interaction with PKCβII.

As shown (Fig. 2F), co-immunoprecipitation assay revealed that S122A mutation of RACK1 suppressed its interaction with PKCβII.

To further clarify whether O-GlcNAcylation of RACK1 was involved, in vitro affinity pull-down assays were performed with HEK293T-expressed (with O-GlcNAcylation) or E. Coli-expressed (without O-GlcNAcylation) recombinant RACK1.

Results indicated that S122A mutation in eukaryotically-derived RACK1 reduced PKCβII binding, whereas this mutation in prokaryotically-expressed RACK1 had little influence on their interaction (Fig. 2G).

In addition, treatment of HEK293T cells with OGT inhibitor, ST078925, reduced O-GlcNAcylation of purified recombinant wild-type RACK1 and suppressed its binding to PKCβII in vitro, but showed little effect on the interaction between recombinant RACK1 S122A mutant and PKCβII (Fig. S3D).

Our previous data also indicated that ribosomal RACK1 coupled with PKCβII to phosphorylate eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E (eIF4E).19

In accordance with this, introduction of RACK1 S122A much less effectively enhanced eIF4E phosphorylation than wild-type RACK1, both in cultured cells and in vitro assay (Fig. S3E and F).

These data suggest that RACK1 O-GlcNAcylation at Ser122 promotes its interaction with PKCβII and subsequent eIF4E phosphorylation.

SECTION

O-GlcNAcylation of RACK1 at Ser122 preferentially stimulates the translation and expression of potent oncogenic factors

PARAGRAPH

To further investigate the significance of RACK1 O-GlcNAcylation at Ser122 in modulating protein synthesis, we utilized TALEN to generate S122A knock-in HuH7 cells.

The S122A mutation also dramatically abolished RACK1 O-GlcNAcylation and reduced endogenous RACK1 protein expression in all HuH7 TALEN cells (Fig. S4).

Metabolic labeling studies revealed that S122A mutation of RACK1 dramatically reduced [35S]-methionine incorporation (Fig. 3A and S5A).

Phosphorylation of eIF4E was also decreased in the mutated cells, while no alteration of eIF2α phosphorylation was observed (Fig. 3B, left panel and S5B, left panel).

PARAGRAPH

Phosphorylation of eIF4E is considered as a key event in oncogenic transformation through activating the translation of several oncogenic factors.24,25

Indeed, the protein expression of potent oncogenes, including cyclin D1, survivin, Bcl-2, Snail, VEGF and GLUT1, were suppressed in RACK1 S122A mutated cells (Fig. 3B, right panel and S5B, right panel), while their mRNA levels were not evidently altered except for GLUT1 (Fig. S5C).

Consistent with the changes in their total protein levels, [35S]-methionine incorporation revealed that de novo protein synthesis of cyclin D1, survivin, Bcl-2, Snail, VEGF, and GLUT1 were inhibited in RACK1 S122A mutated cells (Fig. 3C and S5D).

We also carried out polysome profiling in wild-type and S122A mutant HuH7 cells.

Polysome is a complex of an mRNA molecule and two or more ribosomes that act to translate mRNA instructions into polypeptides.

As shown (Fig. 3D and S5E), we found that the polysome size was reduced in the RACK1 S122A mutants, suggesting decreased translation efficiency which was consistent with the dramatically reduced [35S]-methionine incorporation (Fig. 3A).

In addition, we examined the distributions of oncogenic cyclin D1 (CCND1), survivin (BIRC5), BCL2, SNAI1, VEGF, and GLUT1 mRNAs as well as β-actin (ACTB) mRNA in the polysome fractions.

We found that RACK1 S122A mutation induced the left shift of all mRNAs to the gradient’s fractions containing lighter polysomes (Fig. 3E and S5F).

However, S122A mutation-induced left shift of mRNAs of the potent oncogenic factors was much more significant than that for the ACTB mRNA (Fig. 3E and S5F).

Since light polysomes usually contain poorly translated mRNAs compared to heavy polysomes, S122A mutation induced more suppression on the translation of oncogenic mRNAs than that of ACTB mRNA.

Together, these data suggest that while affecting global translation, O-GlcNAcylation of RACK1 at Ser122 preferentially stimulates the translation of several potent oncogenic factors.

Furthermore, Spearman correlation analysis indicated that the levels of RACK1 O-GlcNAcylation were positively correlated with the expression of cyclin D1, survivin, Bcl-2, Snail, VEGF, and GLUT1 in clinical HCC tissues (Fig. 3F).

SECTION

O-GlcNAcylation of RACK1 at Ser122 promotes tumorigenic behavior of HCC cells in vitro

PARAGRAPH

Given the translational significance of RACK1 O-GlcNAcylation at Ser122, we next examined its effects on the tumorigenic behavior of HCC cells in vitro.

CCK-8 assay revealed that RACK1 S122A mutant cells showed reduced cell viability compared to wild-type cells (Fig. 4A and S6A).

CFSE-labeling experiments also indicated that compared to wild-type cells, RACK1 S122A mutated cells exhibited a significant decrease in cell division (Fig. 4B and S6B).

Moreover, wound healing and transwell assay demonstrated that mutant HuH7 cells exhibited decreased migratory and invasive abilities than control wild-type cells (Fig. 4C-D and S6C–D).

When exposed to commonly used chemotherapy drug 5-Fluorouracil, RACK1 S122A mutant cells showed greatly more apoptosis compared to wild-type cells (Fig. 4E and S6E).

PARAGRAPH

Aberrant tumor-associated angiogenesis and glucose metabolism are also hallmarks of cancer.26

We evaluated whether RACK1 O-GlcNAcylation altered the tube formation behavior by HUVEC cells.

Results indicated that the conditioned medium derived from RACK1 mutated cells induced less formation of tubes in vitro (Fig. 4F and S6F).

In addition, 2-DG assay indicated that RACK1 S122A mutation repressed glucose uptake in HuH7 cells (Fig. 4G and S6G).

As a consequence of glucose metabolism in cancer cells through aerobic glycolysis27 and hexosamine biosynthesis,28 we found that RACK1 mutated cells displayed less release of lactate in culture and lower levels of O-GlcNAcylation in lysates (Fig. 4H–I and S6H–I).

It also implies that O-GlcNAcylation of RACK1 at Ser122 may induce a positive feedback loop to drive the overall O-GlcNAcylation process by enhancing glucose supplement.

Taken together, these results indicate that O-GlcNAcylation of RACK1 at Ser122 promotes tumorigenic behavior of HCC cells in vitro.

SECTION

O-GlcNAcylation of RACK1 at Ser122 drives HCC growth and metastasis in nude mice

PARAGRAPH

To address the biologic significance of RACK1 Ser122 O-GlcNAcylation in tumor growth, subcutaneous xenograft experiments were performed.

Stable cells with similar luciferase activity were selected to eliminate the possible impact of RACK1 mutation on global protein translation.

As shown (Fig. S7A), RACK1 S122A mutation significantly reduced subcutaneous tumor growth.

At the time of harvesting, mice bearing mutant cells developed much smaller tumors than those injected with wild-type cells (Fig. S7B).

Similar results were also observed in orthotopic tumor models (Fig. S7C–D).

Collectively, these data suggest that RACK1 Ser122 O-GlcNAcylation promotes tumor growth in vivo.

PARAGRAPH

We also injected stable cells into lateral tail vein of nude mice and examined tumor metastasis in vivo.

Results showed that the luminescent tumor signal was comparable in mice bearing control and RACK1-mutated HuH7 cells at Day 0.

With the increase in the luminescence intensity in the next five weeks, mice bearing wild-type cells exhibited faster lung colonization rates and stronger metastatic foci signals (Fig. S8A).

After the sacrifice of mice, less metastatic nodules and smaller micrometastatic lesions were detected in lungs of nude mice inoculated with RACK1-mutated cells (Fig. S8B–C).

A reduction in human vimentin positive cells was also observed in lungs from mice injected with mutated HuH7 cells, further suggesting that metastasis to the lungs was inhibited by RACK1 S122A mutation (Fig. S8C).

Furthermore, less liver metastatic foci and micrometastatic lesions could be detected in the RACK1 mutated group compared to the wild-type group (Fig. S8D–E).

Together, these data imply that O-GlcNAcylation of RACK1 at Ser122 promotes HCC metastasis in vivo.

SECTION

Deficiency in RACK1 O-GlcNAcylation at Ser122 suppresses DEN-induced hepatocellular carcinogenesis

PARAGRAPH

We then examined whether RACK1 O-GlcNAcylation at Ser122 contributed to primary HCC carcinogenesis in vivo.

RACK1 S122A knock-in mice were generated via homologous recombination (Fig. S9A).

No remarkable changes in phenotype were observed between wild-type and homozygous Rack1S122A/S122A mice, suggesting that RACK1 O-GlcNAcylation at Ser122 may not be physiologically required for growth and development in mice (Fig. S9B–C).

Immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis revealed that in control normal mice, the RACK1 expression in the livers of wild-type mice is partly higher than in the livers of S122A mutants (Fig. S9D).

At five months after DEN induction, micro-CT imaging was conducted to visualize DEN-induced liver tumoral lesions in vivo.

As shown (Fig. 5A), 91% of wild-type mice were diagnosed with liver cancer, while only 33% of RACK1 mutated mice developed tumors.

The size and numbers of hepatic neoplastic lesions were also much smaller in mice bearing Rack1S122A/S122A mutation (Fig. 5A).

After the sacrifice of mice at eight months, histological analysis confirmed that HCC developed in both wild-type and RACK1 mutated groups, and intratumoral RACK1 expression was dramatically lower in mutated mice (Fig. 5B and S9D).

RACK1 mutated mice developed much smaller tumors and showed less tumor burden than wild-type mice (Fig. 5C).

Meanwhile, less formation of microtumoral lesions and metastatic nodules was observed in the lungs of Rack1S122A/S122A mice (Fig. 5D).

We also detected the protein expression of oncogenic factors that were translationally modulated by RACK1 O-GlcNAcylation.

Results indicated that total protein levels of cyclin D1, survivin, Bcl-2, Snail, VEGF, and GLUT1 were relatively higher in mouse HCC tissues from wild-type mice than those in RACK1 mutated mice (Fig. 5E).

In accordance with this, tumors tissues from wild-type mice showed a higher level of proliferation marker Ki67, lower expression of epithelial marker E-cadherin as well as higher microvascular density, compared to the Rack1S122A/S122A mice (Fig. 5F).

Since tumor initiating cells (TICs) are highly tumorigenic and responsible for metastasis and relapse in HCC,29 fluorescence-activated cell sorting was performed to detect CD133+/EpCAM+ HCC cells from DEN-induced liver tumors.

The results indicated that the percentage of TICs was much lower in the HCC tissues of RACK1 mutated mice (Fig. 5G).

These data suggest that deficiency in RACK1 O-GlcNAcylation at Ser122 suppresses hepatocellular carcinogenesis in vivo.

SECTION

O-GlcNAcylation of RACK1 is increased in HCC and positively correlated with tumor progression

PARAGRAPH

To explore whether the O-GlcNAcylation of RACK1 could influence progression and prognosis in clinical HCC cases, we first evaluated the levels of RACK1 O-GlcNAcylation in fresh paired HCC samples.

Immunoprecipitation, followed by staining with RL-2 antibody, revealed that the O-GlcNAcylation of RACK1 was generally increased in all 20 HCC samples, compared to that in their matched adjacent non-tumor tissues (Fig. 6A and B).

We also examined the levels of RACK1 O-GlcNAcylation in HCC specimens with Duolink PLA analysis.

The results indicated that HCC tissues with higher O-GlcNAcylated RACK1 exhibited stronger staining of Ki67, CD31 and EpCAM as well as lower expression of E-cadherin (Fig. 6C).

In accordance with this, high expression of O-GlcNAcylated RACK1 in HCC was positively correlated with larger tumor size, vessel invasion, advanced T stage, distant metastasis and late AJCC TNM stage, suggesting that RACK1 O-GlcNAcylation contributes to HCC tumorigenesis and progression in clinical cases (Fig. 6D).

PARAGRAPH

We then explored whether RACK1 O-GlcNAcylation was also involved with tumor relapse after curative surgery and standard chemotherapy.

IHC analysis revealed that expression of total RACK1 and O-GlcNAcylated RACK1 were both increased in recurrent tumor tissues, while the increment of O-GlcNAcylated RACK1 was more significant than that of total RACK1 (Fig. 6E).

Nevertheless, the protein level of OGT or OGA was not remarkably changed, suggesting other mechanisms may exist that contribute to the increased level of RACK1 O-GlcNAcylation (Fig. 6E).

Since our data indicated that OGT and RACK1 both associated with eIF4F complex (Fig. 1C), we hypothesized that the upregulation of RACK1 O-GlcNAcylation might be modulated by eIF4F complex assembly.

The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) plays a vital role in the formation of the eIF4F complex.30

And we found that treatment with 5-FU stimulated mTOR activation and 4E-BP1 phosphorylation, and also promoted RACK1/OGT interaction and RACK1 O-GlcNAcylation (Fig. 6F).

In contrast, administration of rapamycin, which blocked eIF4F assembly, repressed the association between OGT and RACK1 as well as subsequent RACK1 O-GlcNAcylation (Fig. 6F), implying that chemotherapy-induced mTOR activation may contribute to increased RACK1 O-GlcNAcylation in relapsed HCC.

Taken together, these findings suggest that O-GlcNAcylation of RACK1 may contribute to tumor progression and relapse in clinical HCC cases.

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

Among neoplasia-associated epigenetic alterations, changes in glycosylation serve as a distinct feature of cancer cells.31

Among the various types of glycosylation, O-GlcNAcylation is a unique mono-saccharide attachment mainly modifying nuclear or cytoplasmic proteins, participating in the modulation of protein phosphorylation, activation, degradation, subcellular localization and interaction.12

Numerous reports have related the increase of O-GlcNAcylation in several types of tumors including HCC,32 and have pointed out the central involvement of O-GlcNAcylation in cancer-relevant processes, including cell signaling, transcription, epigenetics, metabolism and cytoskeletal regulation.13

Nevertheless, the correlation between O-GlcNAcylation and translation remains largely unknown.

So far, over 20 core ribosomal proteins have been found to be modified with O-GlcNAc, and overexpression of OGT caused an accumulation of 60S subunits and 80S monosomes.14

Therefore, O-GlcNAcylation may play a role in modulating translation, while the underlying mechanism remains to be uncovered, especially in cancers.

In this study, our findings demonstrate for the first time that ribosomal RACK1 functions as key mediator linking O-GlcNAc modification to cap-dependent translation during HCC tumorigenesis, and provide clues to understanding the exact roles of O-GlcNAcylation in dysregulated translation in cancer cells.

PARAGRAPH

The role of ribosomal RACK1 has drawn more attention nowadays.

Recently, it was reported that in yeasts, ribosomal RACK1 was required for efficient cap-dependent translation of short mRNAs,33 and the eIF3c interacted with RACK1 and promoted assembly of translation preinitiation complexes.34

Our data and previous studies suggest that ribosomal RACK1/PKCβII phosphorylates eIF6 and eIF4E to direct global and selective protein synthesis, respectively.19,23

A recent report indicates that eIF4E is a potent oncogene hijacked by cancer cells to drive a cap-dependent translational program supporting tumorigenesis.35

In addition to the role in regulating cap-dependent translation, RACK1 also was found to control internal ribosome entry site (IRES)-mediated translation of viruses.36

Interestingly, many mRNAs that contain IRESs are sensitive to stress and encode oncogenic proteins critical to cell growth, differentiation, and survival.37

However, whether RACK1 could modulate the IRES activity of certain oncogene mRNAs remains to be defined, and these findings demonstrate a specific function for ribosomal RACK1 in selective mRNA translation.

PARAGRAPH

In this study, we found that O-GlcNAcylation of RACK1 was increased in relapsed HCC tissues, and 5-Fluorouracil also stimulated RACK1 O-GlcNAcylation in HCC cells, suggesting that induced RACK1 O-GlcNAcylation may contribute to acquired chemotherapy resistance and relapse in patients with HCC (Fig. 6E and F).

Though we only examined the effects of 5-Fluorouracil on mTOR activation in our study, several previous researches have demonstrated that induction of AKT/mTOR activities conferred acquired resistance to chemotherapy and sorafenib,38–42 which are the major therapeutic drugs approved by the FDA for HCC adjuvant treatment.

Interestingly, administration of mTOR inhibitor suppressed OGT/RACK1 interaction and RACK1 O-GlcNAcylation (Fig. 6F).

Therefore, activation of AKT/mTOR signaling may play a role in modulating accessibility of RACK1 to OGT and subsequent RACK1 O-GlcNAcylation, and inhibition of mTOR may overcome the potential unwanted effects induced by chemotherapy/sorafenib treatment.

Indeed, previous reports have shown the effects of mTOR inhibitors in sensitization HCC to chemotherapy and sorafenib treatment in cells and mouse models.43–45

Therefore, our study may also provide a basis for better understanding the molecular mechanism underlying the synergistic anti-tumor effects of mTOR inhibition and chemotherapy/sorafenib in HCC therapy.

PARAGRAPH

Currently, HCC still has an incidence of approximately 850,000 new cases per year globally.1

For most patients who are diagnosed at more developed stages, only chemoembolization (for intermediate HCC) and multikinase inhibitor sorafenib (for advanced HCC) have shown survival benefits.46

Moreover, up to seven large, randomized phase III clinical trials investigating other molecular therapies in the first-line and second-line settings have failed to show better results than sorafenib.47

Therefore, there are major unmet needs in HCC management that might be addressed through the discovery of new therapies and their combinations in the treatment of intermediate- and advanced-stage disease.

In our study, we found that the translation initiation complex eIF4F provided a platform for OGT/RACK1 interaction and RACK1 O-GlcNAcylation (Figs. 1C and 6F).

Therefore, with the progress of cryo-electron microscopy technology in uncovering the structure of ribosome-associated translation initiation complexes, developing small molecules which target the OGT/RACK1 interface in the eIF4F complex might open the road to additional strategies against HCC without unwanted off-target toxicities.

SECTION

Financial support

PARAGRAPH

This work was supported by grants from the National Basic Research Program of China 973 Program (2012CB822104), the National Natural Science Fund (31370808, 81572317, 31630088, 31770855, 31500645, 31600648), Shanghai Rising-Star Program (17QA1400300) and Specialized Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education (20130071120044).

SECTION

Conflict of interest

PARAGRAPH

The authors declare no conflicts of interest that pertain to this work.

PARAGRAPH

Please refer to the accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.

SECTION

Authors’ contributions

PARAGRAPH

F.D. performed and analyzed most of the experiments; H.W. and X.G. performed some of the in vitro experiment; D.J., W.W., and L.W. contributed to the performance and analyses of animal experiments; S.R performed the mass spectrometry analysis; S.S. and F.L. performed histopathological analyses and collected the patient HCC samples.

Y.R. and J.G. designed the experiments.

Y.R. wrote the manuscript.