10.1016/j.jhep.2018.08.008

FULLTEXT

TITLE

miRNAs in patients with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: A systematic review and meta-analysis

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is characterised by excessive fat accumulation without a history of excessive alcohol intake, and the absence of other known liver diseases, such as hepatitis B and hepatitis C virus infection.1–3

NAFLD has been described as the hepatic manifestation of metabolic syndrome, associated with insulin resistance and genetic susceptibility.

NAFLD affects 30% to 40% of the United States population,4 2% to 44% of the European population,5 and 15% to 45% of the Asian population,6 while the Hispanic population is the most susceptible, as up to 45% of this population suffers from NAFLD.7

Sedentary behaviour, low physical activity and poor diet have been defined as the “triple-hit behavioural phenotype”, which is associated with cardio-metabolic health, NAFLD and overall mortality.8

Moreover, the prevalence of NAFLD in children is increasing and was estimated to be approximately 10%.9

NAFLD encompasses a wide spectrum of liver damage, ranging from non-alcoholic fatty liver (NAFL) to non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH).

NAFL is defined as the presence of hepatocyte steatosis without evidence of inflammation.

It is usually non-progressive, while NASH (steatosis with the concomitant presence of inflammation and ballooning) is often progressive, eventually advancing to cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).10

Approximately 2–3% of the general population is affected by NASH; this incidence is increased to 20%–30% among obese or diabetic individuals.11,12

NASH is the second most common indication for liver transplantation in the United States13 and is associated with an increased mortality with excess cardiovascular-, liver-, and cancer-related deaths.14

Thus, improved detection of NASH is urgently needed.

Moreover, distinguishing both NASH from NAFL and fibrosis from advanced fibrosis (>F3) are important goals.1,15,16

PARAGRAPH

Liver biopsy remains the gold standard for the diagnosis of NASH.

A common scoring system to distinguish NAFL and NASH is the NAFLD activity score, which is defined by the sum score of steatosis, ballooning, and lobular inflammation.17

More recently, a new scoring system based on the degree of steatosis (S), the grade of necro-inflammatory activity (A) and fibrosis (F), also known as the SAF score, appears to help distinguish NAFL from NASH.18

However, the potential risks of liver biopsy together with sampling and interpretation variability make it unsuitable for screening in the populations at risk.

Biomarker discovery remains a big challenge because no reliable non-invasive disease biomarker can accurately distinguish mild from severe histological disease stages.

PARAGRAPH

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are non-coding small RNAs capable of controlling translation and modulating gene expression at the post-transcriptional level.

Their impact on gene expression profiles can modify a variety of biological functions, such as lipid and glucose metabolism and thyroid, adipose tissue, stomach, muscle and liver function.19

The miRNAs are very stable because they are resistant to degradation by ribonucleases.20

Thus, circulating miRNAs, i.e., miRNAs detected in serum or plasma, have been proposed as attractive diagnostic tools.21

The scope of applications associated with miRNAs is becoming broader because they are used in different clinical settings, such as early disease detection, disease prediction, monitoring of disease progression and response to treatment for a wide range of disorders.22

miRNAs can also be found in extracellular vesicles (EVs), which are broadly divided into three types: microvesicles, apoptotic bodies and exosomes.23,24

PARAGRAPH

To date, the miRNA expression profiling studies published in patients with NAFLD have reported inconsistent results.

Potentially useful miRNA biomarkers need to be screened and identified.

Moreover, no systematic review or meta-analysis has reported the diagnostic accuracy of miRNAs in distinguishing healthy people and individuals with NAFLD, NAFL, NASH or fibrosis.

The present study aimed to identify potential biomarkers by analysing miRNA expression profiles and to demonstrate the diagnostic accuracy of miRNAs in patients with NAFLD.

SECTION

Materials and methods

SECTION

Study identification and selection

PARAGRAPH

Seven investigators (CHL, JA, AGG, RMV, AR, RMH and RGD) worked as three teams and independently searched the MEDLINE (using PUBMED as the search engine), EMBASE and Cochrane databases.

Databases were used to identify suitable studies that were published up to 2 February 2018.

MeSH terms and keywords were used, and the search terms were as follows: miR, miRNA, microRNA, NAFLD, NASH, fatty liver, steatosis, and a combination of those MeSH terms.

The searches were limited to English-language publications with human subjects.

A manual search was conducted by using the references listed in the original articles and review articles retrieved.

Oral presentations, abstracts and posters from liver disease conferences were also manually searched to collect all studies with both negative and positive results.

The seven investigators collected all results separately.

The inclusion criteria were as follows: a) studies that obtained miRNA expression profiles in patients with NAFLD or NASH; b) studies that reported miRNA diagnostic accuracy for NAFLD or NASH; and c) studies that used liver tissue, serum, plasma, blood, microvesicle, apoptotic body and/or exosome as the samples.

The exclusion criteria were as follows: i) duplicate reports; ii) studies conducted in animals or cell lines; iii) case reports, comments and letters to the editors; and iv) systematic reviews or meta-analyses.

This study was performed according to the PRISMA statement (supplementary information).25

SECTION

Data extraction and quality assessment

PARAGRAPH

From the full text and corresponding supplemental information, seven investigators (CHL, JA, AGG, RMV, AR, RMH and RGD) independently extracted miRNAs according to number, type of samples (liver tissue, serum, plasma, blood, microvesicle, apoptotic body and/or exosome), name of study and year, direction of expression difference (up- or downregulated), sample size, and fold-change from miRNA expression profile studies, as well as data from two-by-two tables, cut-off value, sensitivity, specificity, AUC, and methodological quality (e.g., patient selection, index test, reference standard, flow and timing, patient selection for the applicable concerns, index text for the applicable concerns and reference standards for the applicable concerns) from the diagnostic accuracy studies.

If a certain study used both microarray platform, high-throughput sequencing (RNA-seq) and quantitative reverse transcription-PCR (RT-qPCR), the fold-changes were extrapolated from the RT-qPCR results because RT-qPCR is the most frequently used approach for validation of circulating miRNAs and has superior sensitivity and specificity.

When the same population was published in several journals, we retained only the most informative article or complete study to avoid duplication.

We extracted data from the graphical plots to calculate fold-changes, sensitivity and specificity by using WebPlotDigitizer (version 4.0.0).

According to the Cochrane book, the extracted median from box plots was directly used as the mean in our meta-analysis because the median is very similar to the mean when the distribution of the data is symmetric.26

The extracted data, such as copy number, that could not be converted to fold-changes are reported as “not available”.

If two investigators disagreed, a third author (MRG) was consulted.

Two reviewers (CHL and RMV) independently assessed the qualities of eligible studies by using the Quality Assessment for Studies of Diagnostic Accuracy (QUADAS-2) tool.27

SECTION

Data synthesis

PARAGRAPH

The present study is reported separately in two main parts, namely, the expression profile and the diagnostic accuracy performance (Fig. 1).

All extracted information was divided according to fibrosis severity, NAFLD vs. healthy control, NAFL vs. healthy control, NASH vs. NAFL and NASH vs. healthy control.

Only the miRNAs of expression profile studies from the systematic review that had at least one validation study were included in the meta-analysis.

The vote-counting strategy, a method of ranking potential molecular biomarkers developed by Griffith et al.28 and Chan et al.,29 was used in our meta-analysis.

According to this vote-counting strategy,28,29 miRNAs were ranked as potential biomarkers based on the following criteria, in order of importance: i) the number of studies reporting an miRNA as differentially expressed in the same direction; ii) total sample size for comparison in agreement; and iii) the mean fold-change from all the studies reporting on differential expression that were in agreement and reported the fold-change data.

The total sample size was considered more important than the average fold-change because many studies do not report fold-change.

Moreover, a three-step mean fold-change estimation and calculation were performed to increase the reliability and make comparisons between steps (Fig. 1).

If the results were very different between the second and third steps, the second step, in which the mean fold-changes were calculated with the histograms, was considered more reliable than the third step, in which the mean fold-changes were estimated and calculated with the box plots and scatter plots.

PARAGRAPH

The diagnostic accuracy meta-analysis included studies only if the miRNA was included in three or more published studies.

The heterogeneity among these studies was measured by the Q test and Higgins's inconsistency index (I2).

A p value of more than 0.05 and I2 value more than 50% indicated significant heterogeneity.30

A subgroup analysis was performed to explore the heterogeneity.

A bivariate regression approach was used to estimate the overall sensitivity and specificity with 95% CIs and a summary receiver operating characteristic (sROC) curve approach by using Meta-DiSc v1.4 (Clinical Biostatistics Unit, Ramón y Cajal Hospital, Madrid, Spain).

We also calculated the positive and negative likelihood ratios and the diagnostic odds ratio (DOR).31

We assessed the potential publication bias by using Deeks' funnel plot asymmetry test, in which p <0.10 indicated statistical significance.32

We used STATA version 14 (Stata Corp; College Station, TX) with the program “Midas” for Deeks’ funnel plot.

All statistical tests were two-sided, with p values ≤0.05 denoting statistical significance.

PARAGRAPH

For further details regarding the methods used, please refer to the CTAT table and supplementary information.

SECTION

Results

SECTION

Research results and data extraction

PARAGRAPH

The manual search of conference abstracts was from the year 2008 to 2018 because the first original article33 on the current topic was published earlier in 2008.

As seen in the flow diagram of article selection, a total of 702 studies were excluded.

Thirty-seven original articles and six conference abstracts containing expression profile studies were included in the systematic review, and 20 studies were ultimately included in the meta-analysis.

Five studies that utilised miRNA expression profiles to distinguish fibrosis stage and 12 studies that performed diagnostic accuracy experiments were included in the systematic review, with six studies ultimately included in the meta-analysis.

(Fig. 2) Four clinical setting scenarios were used, and the patients were divided as follows: NAFLD vs. healthy controls (833 total patients), NAFL vs. healthy controls (358 total patients), NASH vs. NAFL (406 total patients) and NASH vs. healthy controls (462 total patients).

Studies that did not report the specific experimental design were not included in this meta-analysis.34–39

In the diagnostic accuracy meta-analysis, three studies reported miRNA-122, and three studies addressed miRNA-34a.

With regard to data extraction, six studies22,40–44 directly reported the fold-changes in the original papers, we extracted the fold-changes from the histograms of eight studies,41,45–50 the fold-changes from the box plots of two studies,51,52 and the fold-changes from the scatter plot of one study.53

SECTION

Data analyses: meta-analysis of miRNA expression profiles

PARAGRAPH

Thirty-seven studies reporting miRNA expression profiles were analysed (Table 1).

Twenty studies with miRNAs that had been included in validation studies in each subcategory of the different clinical scenarios were included in the meta-analysis (Table 2).

The correct method of extracting data from the graphical plots was confirmed by our results, because the mean fold-changes in the third step were very similar to those in the second step.

Therefore, all the fold-changes were interpreted along with the mean fold-changes determined in the third step (if available) to combine the greatest number of published studies, which included eight studies on miRNA-34a and 11 studies on miRNA-122.

Thus, the results on those two miRNAs were considered more reliable because they were included in the greatest numbers of reported studies.

miRNA-122 had the most consistent upregulation in every scenario used to distinguish different clinical settings, such as NAFLD vs. healthy controls with a total sample size of 605 and a mean fold-change of 6.73 (range 5.10–7.90), NAFL vs. healthy controls with a total sample size of 202 and a mean fold-change of 4.31 (range 2.72–5.70), NASH vs. NAFL with a total sample size of 336 and a mean fold-change of 2.61 (range 2.00–3.10) and NASH vs. healthy controls with a total sample size of 410 and a mean fold-change of 7.28 (range 3.04–10.87).

miRNA-34a demonstrated a consistent upregulation in scenarios of NAFLD vs. healthy controls, with a total sample size of 605 and a mean fold-change of 4.42 (range 2.80–6.04).

The upregulation of miRNA-192 showed consistency and usefulness in distinguishing NASH from NAFL, with a total sample size of 262 and a mean fold-change of 2.10 (range: 1.93–2.27).

The upregulated miRNA-21 could be used to distinguish NASH from healthy controls with both serum samples (a total sample size of 216 and a mean fold-change of 1.85 [range 1.46–2.23]) and liver samples (a total sample size of 23 and a mean fold-change of 4.43 [range 4.31–4.51]).

Notably, there was almost always an inconsistent or even inverse correlation between the direction of miRNA expression in the serum and in the liver.

For example, serum miRNA-122 was always upregulated in NAFLD vs. healthy controls40,41,53,54 but was unchanged in liver tissue,55 and miRNA-122 was upregulated in NASH vs. NAFL in serum22,40,41,51,56 and downregulated in liver samples.22

SECTION

Systematic review of miRNAs used to distinguish fibrosis stage, diagnostic accuracy of studies and quality assessment of meta-analysis

PARAGRAPH

Five studies that reported miRNAs to distinguish fibrosis stage (Table 3) and 12 studies that reported diagnostic accuracy (Table 4) were included in the systematic review.

Quality assessment was performed in accordance with the modified QUADAS-2 criteria (Table 5).

Details of the quality assessment are also reported (supplementary information).

The major biases identified in the studies were in “patient selection”40,53,56,57 and “flow and timing”.40,41,56

None of the studies reported the interval between the index text and reference standard because diagnostic performance tests were not the main objective of those studies.40,41,53,56–58

SECTION

Data analyses: meta-analysis of diagnostic accuracy

PARAGRAPH

miRNA-122 showed an AUC of 0.82 (95% CI 0.75–0.89) and DOR of 9.1 (95% CI 4.63–17.96) in the diagnosis of NAFLD vs. healthy controls.

(Fig. 3A) miRNA-34a showed an AUC of 0.78 (95% CI 0.67–0.88) and a DOR of 6.248 (95% CI 2.69–15.34) for the diagnosis of NASH vs. NAFL.

(Fig. 3B).

There was no heterogeneity.

SECTION

Publication bias

PARAGRAPH

The Deeks’ funnel plots32 failed to reveal any publication bias for miRNA-122 (p = 0.53) or miRNA-34a (p = 0.95) (Fig. 3C and 3D).

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

In the present study, the potential biomarkers miRNA-122 and miRNA-192 were consistently upregulated in NASH vs. NAFL, fulfilling a principle requirement for use as biomarkers in clinical practice.

miRNA-122 showed a consistent upregulation in all stages of disease severity, indicating that this miRNA should be further researched.

An inconsistent or inverse correlation was found between circulating and liver-expressed miRNAs.

Although a limited number of studies were included, the sROC curves showed a moderate diagnostic accuracy (0.7–0.9) of miRNA-122 in distinguishing NAFLD vs. healthy control patients and of miRNA-34a in distinguishing NASH vs. NAFL patients.

To our knowledge, this is the first meta-analysis to report either miRNA expression profiles or diagnostic accuracy in patients with NAFLD.

We found consistency in each miRNA expression direction and demonstrated combined mean fold-changes according to disease severity.

We also illustrated the diagnostic performance by using sROC curves.

To avoid publication bias, we also included conference abstracts and posters because negative results are not usually published in international journals as original articles.

The vote-counting strategy we used helps to avoid publication bias by including studies with both negative and positive results.

Compared with traditional vote-counting strategy studies, we further used reliable graphical data extraction software to reverse-engineer raw numerical data from images of data visualizations.

The three-step comparison of the mean fold-changes was used to maximise the sample size and further strengthened the power of the reliability.

PARAGRAPH

Most of the differences found in the miRNAs assessed in this study show biological plausibility according to the main pathogenic mechanisms for NAFLD.

miRNAs are involved in the regulation of lipid metabolism, generation of reactive oxygen species, cell differentiation and also in controlling cell inflammation, proliferation, apoptosis and fibrosis, which were all key events in the pathogenesis of NASH.23,33,59

To date, miRNA-34a and miRNA-122 have been the most investigated miRNAs in patients with NAFLD.

miRNA-34a expression showed an association with susceptibility to NAFLD in mice fed a high-fat diet.60

Anti-sense inhibition of miRNA-34a in obese mice improved metabolic gene expression and metabolic outcome.61

miRNA-34a were upregulated in serum samples of patients with NAFLD,40,41,53,54 and its levels of expression were associated with disease severity.48

miRNA-122 may play an essential role in the regulation of hepatocyte differentiation and liver development.62

Serum miRNA-122 was upregulated in patients with NAFLD.40,41,53

Its concentration was correlated with liver histological stage, severity of liver steatosis,54,63 inflammation grade, and ALT activity.64,65

miRNA-122 was also associated with cholesterol- and lipid-metabolising enzymes,64 and it regulated metabolic pathways (including cholesterol biosynthesis).65,66

Furthermore, serum-obtained miRNAs are more tissue-specific than tumour-specific,67 supporting our principle objective of NASH and fibrosis screening by using circulating miRNAs.

However, downregulation of miRNA-122 has been observed in HCC, often in advanced tumours associated with a poor prognosis.68

Boeri et al. found that a partially different set of miRNAs were dysregulated in plasma before and during the disease course, suggesting that genes and pathways necessary in the earlier phases of disease development are different from those required for tumour maintenance and progression.69

Interestingly, we found that several miRNAs had an inconsistent or inverse correlation between circulating and liver tissue expression.

Pirola et al. also described the same phenomenon with miRNA-122 in patients with NAFLD, suggesting that the lower expression of miRNA-122 in the liver is a consequence of the dynamic regulation of the biological process that produces a high rate of miRNA-122 release into the circulation, supporting our results.22

Furthermore, the same inverse correlation of EVs and liver sample were found by Povero et al.,70 suggesting that the miRNAs might have completely different functions and roles according to the compartment they are transported in.

This new insight may enable the future refinement of miRNA in biomarkers, where the miRNA in the different compartments, such as EVs, are better than whole blood miRNA measurements.

The same inverse correlation was also found for miRNA-101 expression in patients with HCC71 and for miRNA-139-5p in patients with primary biliary cirrhosis.72

Moreover, Boeri et al. found that miRNAs that were dysregulated in liver tissue specimens were rarely detected in plasma samples in patients with lung cancer, further strengthening the high tissue-specificity of miRNAs and suggesting a predictive role of plasma miRNAs independent of tissue specimens.69

Future studies need to investigate why this occurs and what mechanism is involved.

However, a single miRNA can have many targets, potentially providing simultaneous regulation of many genes; furthermore, many different miRNAs can take action synergistically at multiple target sites of a single miRNA.73

Thus, the approach used in the current study cannot overcome this complication.

Another investigatory method, such as the integrated analysis used by Zhu et al.,74 may yield a better understanding of gene regulation and improve systems-level modelling.

Moreover, if a single biomarker is not sufficient to precisely distinguish NASH from NAFL, those miRNAs combined with clinical and laboratory composite scores and metabolomics could further improve the diagnostic and prognostic value.

PARAGRAPH

A problem associated with miRNA expression profiling studies is that they lack agreement.

The present study helped us to address and select potential biomarkers.

However, the following concerns emerged.

First, data normalization used to remove variation across samples can minimise systematic technical or experimental variation and thus inappropriate normalization of the data can lead to incorrect conclusions.

Several normalization methods have been proposed for miRNA expression profiling analyses including the following: a) one or a few endogenous control miRNAs largely invariant in a given sample set (the most commonly used); b) global measure of the miRNA expression data as the normaliser for large-scale miRNA-profiling data sets; and c) spiked-in synthetic control miRNAs that are introduced into the RNA sample at a range of known input amounts (more advanced and rigorous quality control).

To date, there is no consensus regarding the use of control microRNAs for either RT-qPCR, microarray, or RNA-seq; the studies that were included in the present meta-analysis used different housekeeping genes for normalization.

Standard normalization methods for miRNA need to be established carefully and to be scrutinised in specific biological contexts.

Second, the results of a single study may be influenced by variability in sample collection and processing, RNA isolation, the expression profiling platform (the inter-platform reproducibility is relatively low between different platforms)75 and the method of detection.76

For example, Pirola et al.22 used the MIHS 106Z PCR array, which interrogates 84 miRNAs; however, of the twelve validated miRNAs in the previous study, only four (miR-17, miR-150, miR-200a and miR-224) were reproduced in the study performed by Leti et al.76 In terms of choosing the platforms, miRNA microarrays are less expensive but tend to have a lower sensitivity and dynamic range and are therefore best used as discovery tools; however, RT-qPCR generally has the widest dynamic range, highest accuracy and is the only method that can easily provide absolute miRNA quantification.

Third, depending on the goals of miRNA-profiling experiments, measurement of different specimens (liver tissue, serum, plasma, blood, microvesicle, apoptotic body and exosome, etc.) may also contribute to poor reproducibility due to completely different functions and roles according to the compartment the miRNA is transported in, which must be considered.

For example, human blood plasma is a challenging specimen type because miRNA measurements were impacted by high levels of endogenous RNase activity, centrifugation conditions, white blood cell counts and red blood cell hemolysis.77

Fourth, although body mass index, age and diabetes are known to affect miRNA expression, none of the included studies used multivariate Cox logistic regression to adjust for potential confounders.

Fifth, genetic, environmental and clinicopathological differences in donor samples were not considered.

Sixth, most of the included studies did not use or report a priori significant thresholds (e.g., cut-off ≥2 or cut-off ≥2.5).

Finally, although RT-qPCR is the gold standard of gene expression measurement, the presence of inhibitors in serum samples may limit the ability to extract RNA or the ability to accurately measure serum miRNAs by RT-qPCR.78

Thus, future miRNA expression profiling experiments need to address those considerations and avoid those limitations.

For a deeper discussion of miRNA characteristics, sample considerations, miRNA-profiling methods and miRNA data analysis and interpretation, we point readers to a recent review77 by Pritchard et al.

PARAGRAPH

Fibrosis is a major risk factor for the development of HCC; however, we could not draw conclusions on whether miRNAs are useful diagnostic tools with which to distinguish fibrosis stages because of the limited number of published studies.

Nevertheless, an accurate diagnostic tool based on miRNAs will not only aid in NASH diagnosis but will also help mitigate the healthcare burden and improve cost-effectiveness, as medical resources will be diverted toward ‘high-risk’ populations instead of whole populations to perform further investigations.

More importantly, the screening of high-risk populations will ensure a high pre-test probability of identifying clinically significant liver disease because a lower prevalence of the disease decreases the accuracy of the diagnostic methods.79

Moreover, experimental populations should be extended from tertiary referral centres to populations that attend primary care (better reflecting the populations at risk who need to be screened) to avoid selection bias.80

Finally, determination of potential miRNAs to be used as biomarkers could facilitate the development of miRNA therapeutic target drugs.

PARAGRAPH

There were several limitations of the present study.

First, miRNA expression profiling investigations involve several heterogeneities due to their use of different profiling platforms, qPCR normalization controls and various statistics and bio-computational analysis methods.

To resolve this problem, our use of the vote-counting strategy, a ranking system to explore candidate molecular biomarkers, and the inclusion of more than just statistical significance calculations helped us identify the consistencies in miRNA expression from all the findings and avoid bias.

Second, a disadvantage of the vote-counting strategy is that weights of the studies' contributions were ignored, as there were primary studies that did not report non-significant results.

Even though the use of aggregated raw profiling datasets is considered the ideal method of analysing miRNA, it is usually unrealistic to accomplish due to the unavailability of raw datasets, the low concordance of inter-platform results and the large heterogeneity.

Therefore, we still believe the vote-counting strategy is the best option for the meta-analysis of miRNA expression profiling studies.

Third, the different diagnostic criteria were used to diagnostic NASH among the included studies and previous study81 clearly indicated the importance of reference standards, study designs and cut-off values on the results of diagnostic accuracy experiments.

Finally, a relatively small number of patients were included in the individual studies, limiting the strength of the conclusions of our meta-analysis, but we hope our meta-analysis may have provided a basis for future studies.

PARAGRAPH

In conclusion, miRNA-34a, miRNA-122 and miRNA-192 were identified as potential biomarkers with which to distinguish NASH from NAFL.

miRNA-122 demonstrated its usefulness in every scenario in distinguishing disease severity.

Both miRNA-122, in distinguishing patients with NAFLD from healthy controls, and miRNA-34a, in distinguishing patients with NASH from those with NAFL, showed moderate diagnostic accuracy.

SECTION

Financial support

PARAGRAPH

The authors received no financial support to produce this manuscript.

SECTION

Conflict of interest

PARAGRAPH

The authors declare no conflicts of interest that pertain to this work.

PARAGRAPH

Please refer to the accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.

SECTION

Authors’ contributions

PARAGRAPH

Guarantor of the article: MRG.

Study design: MRG.

Drafting the manuscript: CHL, MRG.

Statistical analyses and interpretation: CHL, MRG.

Data acquisition of expression profile part: CHL, AGG, JA.

Data acquisition of fibrosis part: CHL, RMV, RMH.

Data acquisition of diagnostic accuracy part: CHL, AR, RGD.

Critical revision of the manuscript: MRG, JA, AGG.