10.1016/j.jhep.2019.06.017

FULLTEXT

TITLE

FXR modulates the gut-vascular barrier by regulating the entry sites for bacterial translocation in experimental cirrhosis

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

The gut-liver axis represents the pathophysiological hallmark for initiation and/or perpetuation of multiple liver diseases1 and has been proposed to be fueled by pathological bacterial translocation (PBT) from the gut.2

In liver cirrhosis, PBT from the gut into the liver and systemic circulation is one of the causes of bacterial infections and the augmented pro-inflammatory response to gut-derived products.2,3

In fact, failure to control invading bacteria and bacterial products in concert with host susceptibility determines remote organ injury in liver cirrhosis.

This may include acute-on-chronic liver failure, hepatorenal syndrome and hepatic encephalopathy, which are all associated with worsening prognosis.4

PBT in liver cirrhosis has been attributed to small intestinal bacterial overgrowth, increased intestinal permeability and lack of host defense mechanisms.5

Herein, we focused on the first and last barrier separating luminal bacteria and the vascular compartment, namely intestinal mucus and the newly defined gut-vascular barrier (GVB),6 neither of which have been addressed so far in liver cirrhosis and PBT.

PARAGRAPH

Mucus represents the first frontier that commensal microbes in the gut have to cross in order to achieve PBT.

The mucus consists of 2 layers with a similar protein composition where mucin-2 (MUC2) is the main component.7

On one hand, the inner mucus layer is firmly attached to the epithelium, is densely packed and is devoid of bacteria.8

On the other hand, the outer mucus layer is much more mobile, looser and is colonized with a distinct bacterial community.9

Goblet cells (GCs) are responsible for the formation of both the inner and outer mucus layer10 but also sense bacteria11 and react accordingly with mucin secretion.12,13

After crossing the mucus and epithelial barrier, translocating bacteria reach the lymphatic system, as shown by culture positive mesenteric lymph nodes in experimental cirrhosis in multiple independent studies.14,15

In contrast, access to the intestinal microcirculation and portal-venous route has been proposed for PBT,16 but has not been delineated in detail in portal hypertension and liver cirrhosis yet.

The splanchnic circulation in portal hypertension presents with multiple vascular abnormalities17 including arterial vasodilation,14 hyporesponsiveness to vasoconstrictors18,19 and increased angiogenesis.20

However, accessability of the intestinal microcirculation and thus, portal-venous route has not been investigated in portal hypertension so far.

Endothelial barriers are characterized by the presence of junctional complexes which strictly control paracellular trafficking of solutes, fluids and cells.21

In healthy conditions, the endothelial vascular barrier discriminates between differently sized particles of the same nature with 4 kDa-dextran freely diffusing through the endothelium, whereas 70 kDa-dextran does not.

Plasmalemma vesicle-associated protein (PV)-1 is an endothelial cell-specific protein that forms the stomatal and fenestral diaphragms of blood vessels22 and regulates basal permeability.23

PARAGRAPH

Liver cirrhosis is characterized by deficient levels of luminal bile acids in the gut.24

Bile acids have been long known for their major effects on the microbiome and the intestinal barrier function.

They exert their effects via transcription factors among which the farnesoid X receptor (FXR) is known to be one of the most important.

FXR activation has been reported to influence epithelial cell proliferation25 and to exert potent anti-inflammatory actions in the intestine, stabilizing epithelial integrity.26–29

Moreover, FXR stimulation in the small intestine exerts antibacterial actions via induction of antimicrobial substances30 and FXR-agonists have been shown to ameliorate chemically induced intestinal inflammation, improving symptoms of colitis and inhibiting epithelial permeability.

However, the exact role of bile acids and FXR in controlling intestinal muco-epithelial as well as vascular permeability is still unknown.

In addition, the microbiome has been proposed to play a key role in mucus synthesis, release and barrier-function31 but information on its impact on GC density and mucus thickness are limited.

Finally, although colonization by microbial commensals is known to promote vascular development32 its impact and modulatory role on the GVB-function is not known.

PARAGRAPH

Taken together, the aims of the current study were i) to characterize changes in the mucus barrier, as well as GVB, in germ-free conditions and in the context of liver cirrhosis or portal hypertension; ii) to delineate PBT from the gut to the liver along the gut-liver axis in liver cirrhosis; iii) to unravel the role(s) of FXR on PBT, the mucus barrier and GVB.

SECTION

Materials and methods

SECTION

Mice and animal models

PARAGRAPH

Female C57BL/6J mice were purchased from ENVIGO (Horst, The Netherlands) and kept at the Central Animal Facility of the University of Bern under specific pathogen-free (SPF) conditions.

Mice were kept in next-generation IVC cages with an enriched environment, 12 h day-night cycle and fed ad libitum.

All experiments involving animals were performed in accordance with Swiss Federal regulations and with local institutional approval.

Where indicated, animals were kept in either germ-free conditions or gnotobiotic conditions (with a stable defined moderately diverse mouse microbiota [sDMDM2] that consists of 12 bacterial species) which have been developed and used previously in our lab.9

The intestine-specific Fxr-null (FxrΔIE) mice are on a C57BL/6 genetic background and kindly provided by Prof. B. Schnabl from University of California San Diego, USA.

SECTION

Bile-duct ligation

PARAGRAPH

Bile-duct ligation (BDL) was performed as previously described.33

Briefly, in an aseptic setting, the abdomen was incised in the midline under isoflurane anesthesia and administration of buprenorphine 60 µg/kg body weight.

The bile duct was then cleared from adjacent structures.

Three different ligatures were placed along the bile duct with a non-absorbable suture and the bile duct was resected between the second and third ligature.

Sham-operated mice were treated similarly but no ligature was placed.

Experiments were performed 10 days to 4 weeks after surgery.

SECTION

Partial portal vein ligation

PARAGRAPH

To induce pre-hepatic portal hypertension, partial portal vein ligation (PPVL) was performed as follows: in an aseptic setting, the abdomen was incised in the midline under isoflurane anesthesia and administration of buprenorphine 60 µg/kg body weight.

The portal vein was cleared from surrounding tissue.

To achieve only partial and not complete ligation, a non-absorbable suture was placed around a 26-gauge blunt-tipped needle lying alongside the portal vein.

After ligation the blunt-tipped needle was removed, leaving a calibrated stenosis on the portal vein.

Sham-operated mice were treated the same with no ligature placed.

Experiments were performed 14 days after surgery.

SECTION

CCl4-induced cirrhosis

PARAGRAPH

Cirrhosis was induced according to the method described before in rats (Runyon, Sugano, Kanel, & Mellencamp, 1991) and modified for mice.34

After 1 week of phenobarbital administration in the drinking water (0.3 g/L), CCl4 inhalation was started: mice were placed 3 times per week in a gas chamber and compressed air, bubbling through a flask containing CCl4, was passed into the gas chamber via a flowmeter (2 L/min).

Afterwards, bubbling was stopped and animals were left to breath normal air.

The length of CCl4 exposure was progressively increased, 1 min of bubbling the first week, 1.5 min of bubbling in the second week, and then 2 min of bubbling throughout the rest of the experiment.

Mice were treated with 1 cycle/treatment in the initial 3 weeks, with 2 cycles/treatment in the fourth week, and with 3 cycles/treatment thereafter.

Once treatment consisted of 2 or more cycles, these were separated by at least 10 min of breathing in ambient air not containing CCl4.

SECTION

Thoracic-duct ligation

PARAGRAPH

Thoracic-duct ligation was performed as previously described with some alterations.35

After gavage of an oil solution 30 min prior to the operation, mice were anesthetized and a left-sided subcostal incision was performed.

After incision of the dorsal retroperitoneum, the aorta was freed from surrounding fatty tissue.

The thoracic duct was exposed and carefully freed from the aorta.

A metal clip was then placed for closure of the thoracic duct (Clip 9 Vitalitec, Peters Surgical, Bobigny Cedex, France).

The incision was closed with a 2-layer running suture (Prolene 6-0, Ethicon, Johnson & Johnson, Spreitenbach, Switzerland).

SECTION

Pharmacologic FXR modulation

PARAGRAPH

Pharmacological FXR modulation was achieved by high-affinity FXR-agonists, namely fexaramine (Fex)36 and obeticholic acid (OCA)37 treatment by oral gavage.

Fex is known to lack major absorption and systemic appearance (<30 nm per oral 100 mg/kg/day).

Thus, its activity is focused luminally in the intestine, and hence at the muco-epithelial site.38

In contrast, OCA per os is rapidly and highly absorbed, achieving sufficient systemic drug levels (>10 µmol in serum after 30 mg/kg/day39), thus targeting the muco-epithelial, endothelial and hence, GVB.

SECTION

In vivo permeability and intestinal loop assay

PARAGRAPH

Mice were placed under isoflurane anesthesia; middle line laparotomy was performed and the terminal ileum was exteriorized and 1 cm of terminal ileum ligated.

A total of 8 mg of 4 kDA FITC-dextran (Sigma-Aldrich) or GFP-E.

coli (105 colony-forming units [CFUs]) were injected in the loop dissolved in 200 µl of saline.

One hour after injecting the liver, mesenteric lymph nodes (MLNs), spleen and the intestinal loop were harvested and fixed in Carnoy’s fixative (60% Ethanol, 30% Chloroform, 10% glacial acetic acid) and embedded in paraffin.

The amount of the dye was measured in the liver, spleen and MLN by immunofluorescence of 5 µm sections stained with 4′,6-diamidin-2-fenilindolo (DAPI).

Number of particles (FITC-signal or GFP-E.

coli) were counted per high-power field at 40x in a fluorescence microscope (Nikon, Eclipse Ti-E).

In some experiments, prior to isolation of the loop and inoculation of FITC-dextran or GFP-E.

coli the thoracic duct was ligated to avoid any lymphatic drainage of translocating agents into the systemic circulation that otherwise could contribute to the hepatic counts.

To control for tissue auto-fluorescence some intestinal loops were injected with saline and no particles were counted in the tissue harvested from these mice.

SECTION

In vivo intravital probe-based confocal laser endomicroscopy

PARAGRAPH

Mice were placed under isoflurane anesthesia and 1 cm long incision was made on the skin to expose the peritoneal wall.

An additional small incision was made on the peritoneum to expose the abdominal cavity.

A 3 cm to 4 cm loop from the ileum was externalized and endomicroscopy probe (ColoFlex™ UHD, Mauna Kea Technologies) was fixed at an angle of 60° from the operation table close to the exposed intestinal loop.

A small incision was made in the anti-mesenteric surface of the intestinal wall and the endomicroscopy probe was inserted in the intestine.

The probe was placed so that at least 1 villus was visualized on the screen.

After stable imaging was achieved a retro-orbital intravenous injection was made with a FITC-dextran solution (50 µl of 40 mg/ml for 4 kDa-FITC-dextran, 50 µl of 10 mg/ml for 40 kDa and 70 kDa-FITC-dextran or 100 µl of 10 mg/ml for 150 kDa-FITC-dextran solution from SIGMA).

Immediately after the injection, the FITC signal was observed in the intestinal villi capillaries and the intestine was pulled using forceps in order to scan the epithelial surface.

An endoscopy video was recorded for 30 min of total observation time.

SECTION

Endothelial leakage analysis from in vivo endomicroscopy

PARAGRAPH

Cellvizio Viewer software (Mauna Kea Technologies) was used in order to extract the photograms from the endomicroscopy video.

The images with focused vessels and normal blood flow were selected.

At least 1 picture per time point was selected and 7 measurements were taken per picture.

Measurements were made using Image J as follows: straight lines perpendicular to the vessel were drawn in each vessel within the picture and grey value measured in each pixel along the line.

Mean grey value (MGV) of the vessel was calculated and background fluorescence was extracted, MGV of the immediate extravascular space was calculated in the same way.

To avoid a bias in our measurements we took the same numbers of pixels analyzed from the intra and extravascular space in all the mice.

We also avoid measuring these extravascular spaces where more than 1 vessel could contribute to the fluorescence values.

Results are shown as a ratio between mean of extravascular fluorescence and mean of intravascular fluorescence.

When extravasation was too high to distinguish vessels from lamina propria a value of 1 was given arbitrarily.

SECTION

Interepithelial leakage analysis from in vivo endomicroscopy

PARAGRAPH

Cellvizio Viewer software (Mauna Kea Technologies) was used in order to extract the photograms from the endomicroscopy video.

Only these photograms where the vessels were in focus and properly perfused were selected.

The first time when the majority of the interepithelial spaces were seen positive for fluorescein was noted.

When this requirement was not accomplished a value of 30 min was given.

SECTION

Dual-band confocal laser endomicroscopy in vivo in intestinal loop experiments

PARAGRAPH

Mice were anesthetized with an isofluorane-oxygen mixture.

Laparotomy was performed and terminal ileum intestinal loop exposed.

Endomicroscopy probe (UltraMiniO) was fixed at an angle of 60° from the operating table close to the exposed intestinal loop.

A small incision was made in the anti-mesenteric surface of the intestinal wall and the endomicroscopy probe was inserted in the intestine.

The probe was placed so that at least 1 villus was visualized on the screen.

After stable imaging was achieved, 1 ligature was placed 1 cm proximal to the gut opening and another around the probe and the gut itself.

After ligation retro-orbital intravenous injection of 100 µl of 2% Evans blue (SIGMA) solution was performed.

GFP-E.

coli was injected to the loop (105 CFU in 0.2 ml media).

Visualization of E.coli and intestinal villi capillaries was performed using Cellvizio ® Dual Band (Mauna Kea Technologies) for 1 h.

SECTION

Immunofluorescence and confocal microscopy for endothelial cell-to-cell-interactions and PV-1

PARAGRAPH

Intestinal samples were fixed overnight in paraformaldehyde, L-Lysine pH 7.4 and NaIO4 (PLP buffer).

They were then washed, dehydrated in 20% sucrose overnight and included in the optimal cutting temperature compound.

Cryosections of 10 µm were rehydrated, blocked with 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 2% FBS, 0.3% Triton X-100 and stained with the following antibodies: anti-mouse PV-1 or PLVAP (clone MECA32, BD Pharmingen), anti-ZO1 (clone ZO1-1A12, Invitrogen), anti-Occludin (clone OC-3F10, Invitrogen), anti-mouse CD34 (clone RAM34, eBioscience).

Slices were then incubated with the appropriate fluorophore-conjugated secondary antibody.

Before imaging, nuclei were counterstained with DAPI.

Confocal microscopy was performed on a Leica TCS SP5 laser confocal scanner mounted on a Leica DMI 6000B inverted microscope equipped with motorized stage.

Image J software package was used for image analysis and fluorescence quantification.

SECTION

Goblet cell analysis

PARAGRAPH

Sections (1 cm) of different parts of the small intestine (duodenum, jejunum and ileum) and colon were fixed in Carnoy’s fixative (60% Methanol, 30% Chloroform and 10% Glacial acetic acid) overnight and embedded in paraffin.

Thin cuts of 6 µm were deparaffinized and GC stained with periodic acid-Schiff solution (PAS) and hematoxylin to stain nuclei.

Pictures were taken at 200x magnification with a bright field microscope GC were counted and villi perimeter measured using Image J.

We have demonstrated that perimeter of the villi strongly correlates (R2 = 0.9028) with the number of epithelial cells (data not shown).

Hence the ratio between the number of GCs and perimeter is representative of the proportion of GCs amongst epithelial cells in a given villus.

SECTION

Mucus parameters

PARAGRAPH

Mucus thickness measurements in gut explants were performed using a micromanipulator holding a cell injection pipette with the corresponding glass capillary tilted to a delivered angle.

The position of the capillary was recorded when touching the mucus layer and recorded again when touching the villus, visualized under a stereomicroscope.

Mucus thickness was calculated via trigonometrical approach as the product between the measured distance and the sinus of the given angle.

Five measurements per organ were performed.

The inner mucus layer in sDMDM2-conditions was assessed for bacterial load after removing the outer layer by suction, harvesting manually and culturing on lysogeny broth agar plates for 12 h. Results were shown as CFUs per mg mucus.

SECTION

Electron microscopy

PARAGRAPH

Mouse intestine was fixed with 2.5% glutaraldehyde (Agar Scientific, Stansted, Essex, UK) and 2% paraformaldehyde (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) in 0.1 M Na-cacodylate-buffer (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) with a pH of 7.33.

Samples were fixed for at least 24 h before being further processed.

Samples were then washed with 0.1 M Na-cacodylate-buffer 3 times, each for 5 min, post-fixed with 1% OsO4 (Electron Microscopy Sciences, Hatfield, USA) in 0.1 M Na-cacodylate-buffer at 4 °C for 2 h, and then washed in 0.05 M maleic acid (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) 3 times, each for 5 min.

Thereafter samples were dehydrated in 70, 80, and 96% ethanol (Alcosuisse, Switzerland) for 15 min each at room temperature.

Subsequently, the tissue was immersed in 100% ethanol (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) 3 times, each for 10 min, in acetone (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) 2 times, each for 10 min, and finally in acetone-Epon (1:1) overnight at room temperature.

The next day, samples were embedded in Epon (Sigma-Aldrich, Buchs, Switzerland) and left to harden at 60 °C for 5 days.

Sections were produced with an ultramicrotome UC6 (Leica Microsystems, Vienna, Austria), first semithin sections (1 µm) for light microscopy, which were stained with a solution of 0.5% toluidine blue O (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany), and then ultrathin sections (75 nm) for electron microscopy.

The sections, mounted on 200 mesh copper grids, were stained with uranyless (Electron Microscopy Sciences, Hatfield, USA) and lead citrate (Leica Microsystems, Vienna, Austria) with an ultrostainer (Leica Microsystems, Vienna, Austria).

Sections were then examined with a transmission electron microscope (CM12, Philips, Eindhoven) equipped with a digital camera (Morada, Soft Imaging System, Münster, Germany) and image analysis software (iTEM).

SECTION

RNA sequencing and network analysis

PARAGRAPH

Whole tissue RNA was extracted from frozen ileum sections by homogenizing with Tissue Lyzer (QIAGEN) and TRIzol reagent (Life Technologies).

A total of 200 μl of chloroform was added, samples mixed and centrifuged for 10 min.

The upper RNA-containing phase was recovered and RNA precipitated with ice-cold isopropanol.

The solution was centrifuged and the RNA pellet washed with 75% ethanol.

Once dried, it was resuspended in RNase-free water.

Concentration and purity was measured with Bioanalyzer (AGILENT).

Library preparation was done using the RIboMinus protocol.

Libraries were sequenced by Illumina HiSeq 3000 on the 100 bp paired-end mode.

The quality of the reads was documented as well as the number of them and they were mapped to the mouse genome.

The number of reads per gene was compared to the different experimental groups using DESeq2 package from R software.

Adjusted p value and log2 fold-change was calculated according to Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995.

Protein-protein interactions were performed using the STRIG database for these proteins whose genes were significantly upregulated (log2 fold-change higher than 2 and adjusted p value lower than 0.01).

SECTION

Statistical analysis

PARAGRAPH

Statistical differences were evaluated using GraphPad Prism software Version7.0.

The values were compared using either Student’s t test or ANOVA.

Survival analysis were performed by Mantel-Cox-analysis.

In all the cases, the statistical test used is indicated in each figure legends.

Results were represented as mean ± SEM.

*p <0.05, **p <0.01, ***p <0.001.

SECTION

Results

SECTION

Increased gut-liver translocation in intestinal loop experiments in cirrhotic but not pre-hepatic portal-hypertensive mice

PARAGRAPH

In control mice, as well as in PPVL-animals, neither GFP-E.

coli nor 4 kDa-FITC-dextran translocated from the ileum to the liver (Fig. 1A).

However, 4 kDa-FITC-dextran, as well as GFP-E.

coli, were detectable in high numbers and hence, significantly increased in translocation to the liver in cirrhotic (BDL and CCl4-treated) mice (Fig. 1B).

This was also confirmed in vivo by applying the dual-band laserendomicroscopy to the liver 1 h after loading the intestinal loop with GFP-E.

coli (Fig. S1).

In animals with prior ligation of the thoracic duct, the number of GFP-E.

coli observed intrahepatically was not significantly altered (Fig. 1C), suggesting that penetrating intestinal bacteria reach the liver mainly via the portal-venous circulation within the protocol applied here.

SECTION

Lymphatic route of bacterial translocation is physiologically active and increased in intestinal loop experiments in BDL cirrhotic but not in pre-hepatic portal-hypertensive mice

PARAGRAPH

In healthy mice, 4 kDa-FITC-dextran (not shown) as well as GFP-E.

coli translocated from ileal loop to MLNs and Peyer’s patches (PPs), demonstrating a physiological low rate of translocation along the lymphatic route (Fig. S2A).

This lymphatic bacterial translocation was not increased in PPVL mice but augmented in BDL mice (Fig. S2A).

Interestingly, the quantity of GFP-E.

coli translocation to PPs was about 2-fold increased compared to MLNs.

Moreover, surprisingly supernatant from PPs but not MLNs contained high numbers of GFP-E.

coli, indicating cell-independent passage and translocation (Fig. S4C).

However, the severity of translocation to MLNs appeared to be less pronounced than the gut-liver axis (Fig. S2B).

Internalization analysis shows that the cellular fraction of MLNs and PPs from BDL mice have more GFP internalized than those from healthy controls and PPVL mice (Fig. S4 A,B).

The subgroup analysis of GFP-transporting cells revealed the highest frequency among CD11c+/myeloid dendritic cells (Fig. S4 D,E).

In addition, in the cellular fraction of MLNs from BDL mice, significantly more neutrophils were observed than in the corresponding evaluation in sham and/or PPVL mice.

Analysis of all cellular fractions that do not have GFP internalized (or attached) revealed significantly more neutrophils and CD11c+/myeloid dendritic cells in MLNs and PPs from BDL mice than from healthy controls and/or PPVL mice (data not shown).

SECTION

Mucus layer is reduced in thickness with loss of GCs and MUC2-expression associated with bacterial overgrowth in inner mucus layer in cirrhotic but not PPVL mice

PARAGRAPH

As the number of GCs is higher in the distal than the proximal portion of the small intestine (data not shown), with the highest numbers in the terminal ileum, we focused on this site for any further investigations.

We observed a marked reduction in mucus thickness and GC numbers in germ-free mice (Fig. 2A), underlining the role of the microbiota as a stimuli for the mucus compartment.

However, villus morphology in terms of length and perimeter was not changed in germ-free conditions (Fig. S5A).

Moreover, distribution of GCs along the villus with more numbers per length of villus within the base as compared to the apex as well as almost lack of empty appearing GC was similar in germ-free and colonized mice (Fig. S5B, Fig. 2B).

In germ-free conditions, short-term BDL mice (Fig. 2C) presented with reduced mucus thickness.

However, BDL mice presented with increased mortality in germ-free conditions (Fig. S6) preventing further investigations.

Thus, we utilized an sDMDM2, as a gnotobiotic animal model, consisting of 12 pre-defined bacterial species.40

This microflora also increased GC counts and mucus thickness in the terminal ileum of healthy mice.

In more detail, this increase in GC in response to this more diverse microflora resulted in an increased number of mucin-filled GCs, predominantly in the base of the villus.

Cirrhotic mice under sDMDM2-conditions presented with lower mucus thickness, mucus weight per ileum length, and GC numbers in the terminal ileum compared to healthy controls (Fig. 2G,H,I, Fig. S5C), predominantly with a reduction in mucin-filled GCs (Fig. 2J, Fig. S5D).

Moreover, BDL-cirrhosis resulted in more than 100x increased bacterial burden in the inner mucus layer (Fig. 2F), evidencing a closing in of bacteria on the epithelial surface, which is normally almost devoid of bacteria.

Also, microbial composition changed in BDL mice presenting with increased abundance of particularly Enterococcus within the mucus compartment compared to sham mice (Fig. S7).

On the other hand, decreased abundance of Verrucomicrobia and Parasutterella was noted in ileal mucus of BDL mice.

Surprisingly, also in pre-hepatic portal hypertension per se (in PPVL mice), minor dysbiosis was observable but there was no change in the abundance of Enterococci (Fig. S7C).

PARAGRAPH

In cirrhotic mice, those with the lowest mucus thickness within the terminal ileum under sDMDM2-conditions presented with the most pronounced bacterial translocation to the liver (Fig. S5E).

Contemporarily, cirrhotic animals with pathological translocation to MLNs or with ascites presented with reduced numbers of GCs (Fig. S5 F,G).

This indicates that GC numbers decrease with advanced stages of disease and/or presence of PBT.

Under sDMDM2 conditions, total GC count and mucus thickness were not only diminished in long-term and cirrhotic BDL mice, but already 3 days after BDL (Fig. 2C) and hence independent of fibrosis/cirrhosis.

In that regard, we observed particularly reduced numbers of full but a trend to more empty GCs (Fig. 2J).

In contrast, in germ-free conditions, no change in GC numbers was noted 3 days after BDL (Fig. 2D).

As for the role of portal hypertension per se, no differences in terms of mucus thickness, mucus weight per segment ileum, or total numbers of GCs, as well as numbers of mucin-filled or empty GCs, were observed in PPVL mice compared to control animals (Fig. 2 G,H,L,M).

PARAGRAPH

RNA sequencing of whole ileal tissue revealed upregulation of genes involved in bile acid metabolism, chemotaxis and T-cell recruitment and downregulation of genes involved in phagocytosis, antigen-presentation, lipid metabolism and GC/intestinal barrier regulation in BDL mice (Fig. 3A).

Notably, downregulation of the main mucin-genes (MUC2,-3,-4,-13) was observed, suggesting a lack of mucin-synthesis in ileal GCs in BDL mice (Fig. 3C).

In contrast, no changes in mucin-gene-expression (except for MUC13) could be observed in PPVL mice (Fig. 3B, C).

However, ileal expression of antimicrobial peptides REG3Band REG3G were upregulated in BDL mice without detectable changes in PPVL mice (Fig. 3D).

SECTION

Interepithelial leakage and bacterial translocation across the epithelial barrier into the lamina propria are enhanced in cirrhotic but not in pre-hepatic portal-hypertensive mice

PARAGRAPH

Dual-band confocal laserendomicroscopy in vivo (Fig. 4), as well as confocal microscopy ex vivo (data not shown), evidenced translocation of GFP-E.

coli from the ileal lumen into the lamina propria in BDL mice.

Astonishingly, even at high-concentrations of GFP-E.

coli within the intestinal loops, no clear translocation of bacteria across the well-visualized epithelial barrier was noted in healthy control mice during the 30 min observation period (Fig. 4B).

Interepithelial permeation of 70 kDA- and 150 kDA-FITC-dextran into the ileal epithelial layer was not detectable in any control animal (Fig. 5A,B).

In contrast, in cirrhotic (BDL and CCl4-treated) mice, but likewise not in PPVL mice, interepithelial leakage of 70 kDa-FITC-dextran was observed (Fig. 5A).

Correspondingly, PPVL did not show any increase in fecal albumin (66–70 kDA), whereas cirrhotic mice excreted high amounts of albumin demonstrating a disruption of the epithelial barrier (Fig. S8).

Large-sized 150 kDA-FITC-dextran did not leak into the interepithelial space, to the degree defined per protocol to indicate epithelial barrier dysfunction in any of the study groups (Fig. 5B).

PARAGRAPH

A semiquantitative analysis of immunohistochemistry revealed the downregulation of main tight junction (TJ) proteins in ileal epithelium including ZO1, occludin and claudin-1,-2 in CCl4-induced cirrhotic mice compared to naïve control mice (Fig. S9).

Cirrhotic mice treated with OCA showed a significant increase in all TJ proteins, either reaching or approaching values present in naïve control mice.

Cirrhotic mice treated with Fex showed similar results, significantly increasing protein expression of all TJ proteins, except occludin, compared to untreated cirrhotic mice.

SECTION

Gut-vascular barrier dysfunction in cirrhotic but not pre-hepatic portal-hypertensive mice is independent of intestinal microbiota

PARAGRAPH

In healthy control animals under SPF conditions we could clearly see that 4 kDa-FITC- dextran extravasated immediately after injection into the lamina propria (Suppl. Video 1), while 40 kDa stayed transiently in the vessel but leaked progressively through the endothelium within the first 3 to 5 min, reaching a 1:1 ratio after around 10 min (Fig. 6B).

70 kDa Dextran-FITC could stay in the vessel for up to 8 min, staining capillaries and giving contrast between vessels and lamina propria, although also extravasated between 5 and 20 min.

Finally, 150 kDa-Dextran-FITC remained intravascular for all the observation (30 min) in control mice (Fig. 6B).

Ileal vascular permeability was increased in cirrhotic (BDL and CCl4) mice with early and enhanced extravasation of 70 kDA (Fig. 6E) and 150 kDa-FITC-dextran (Fig. 6F) compared to control mice.

In contrast, like sham mice, none of the PPVL mice presented with augmented leakage of 150 kDa-FITC-dextran (Fig. 6F).

Almost identical kinetics and severity of leakage of pre-defined FITC-dextrans were observed in germ-free control mice compared to SPF conditions (Fig. 6A,B).

Namely, small-sized 4 kDA- and 40 kDA-FITC-dextrans permeated early and severely, whereas large-sized 150 kDA-FITC-dextran remained intravascularly during the whole observation period.

Only 70 kDA-FITC-dextran extravasated earlier and more severely in germ-free compared to SPF-mice.

Short-term BDL mice in germ-free conditions presented with vastly disrupted GVB, exhibiting rapid and severe extravasation of even large-sized 150 kDA-FITC-dextran (Fig. 6 C,D).

SECTION

Increased PV1-expression and changes in endothelial cell morphology correlate with disrupted GVB in cirrhosis

PARAGRAPH

Ileal GVB impairment was associated with increased PV-1 expression along the gastrointestinal tract.

Interestingly, gut vascular analysis in terms of immunofluorescence for PV-1 expression showed increased staining in all small and large bowel locations, in CD34-positive vessels in cirrhotic BDL mice (Fig. 7A,B).

However, PPVL mice displayed minor enhancement in the ileum and significant increases in the colon compared to sham mice (Fig. 7 C,D).

Electron microscopy revealed no major changes in the number of fenestrae, caveolae or perimeter of capillaries assessed in cirrhotic or pre-hepatic portal-hypertensive capillaries (Fig. 8A-C).

However, morphologically endothelial fenestrae appeared enlarged and inter-cellular membranes reduced in electrodensity in cirrhotic ileal capillaries (Fig. 8D).

SECTION

Role of FXR for ileal mucus and gut-vascular barrier and thus pathological translocation along the gut-liver axis

PARAGRAPH

Oral treatment with OCA, as well as Fex, significantly ameliorated pathological translocation of GFP-E.

coli from the ileal lumen to the liver in cirrhotic mice (Fig. 9A,B), underlining the impact of pharmacological FXR activation on “sealing” the access to the gut-liver axis.

However, none of FxrΔIEC mice analyzed showed any translocation of even small 4 kDa FITC-dextran or GFP-E.

coli to the liver (data not shown).

In contrast, performing PPVL on FxrΔIEC mice led to a small but evident increase in intrahepatically recoverable 4 kDa FITC-dextran, which was not observed in wild-type PPVL mice (Fig. 9 C,D).

Also, in individual PPVL-FxrΔIEC–mice, GFP-E.

coli was retrievable intrahepatically (data not shown).

PARAGRAPH

Immunohistochemistry for FXR in the ileum revealed that FXR was not expressed in VillinCre+/− Fxrfl/fl mice (VillinCre Fxrfl/fl in figure legends), but it was expressed in epithelial cells in Villin−/− Fxrfl/fl (wild-type in figure legends) (Fig. S10).

FXR was expressed in all enterocytes but was absent in the nuclei of all PAS-positive mucin-filled GCs (Fig. S10).

Interestingly we also observed a gradual reduction of FXR expression from the apex of the villus, where the expression was higher, to the base of the crypt.

This absence of FXR expression is specifically more pronounced at the base of the crypt in which stem cells and Paneth cells are located and the highest concentration of GCs is found.

PARAGRAPH

As for the muco-epithelial barrier, OCA-treatment partly restored GC numbers in cirrhotic animals to levels not statistically different from control animals (Fig. S10).

In addition, OCA significantly increased ileal TJ protein expression (ZO1, claudin-1,-2 and occludin), upregulating them to the level of healthy control mice (Fig. S9).

Likewise, Fex improved TJ protein immunohistochemical staining (Fig. S9), but failed to improve GVB when challenged with 70 kDA-FITC-dextran (Fig. 9H) in CCl4-mice.

In contrast, endothelial FXR stimulation, by OCA, at least partly attenuated GVB dysfunction in cirrhotic mice (Fig. 9G).

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

In this paper we report changes in mucus- and GVB in relation to microbial modulation and as entry sites for PBT along the gut-liver axis in cirrhosis.

Standardized in vivo intestinal loop experiments are utilized to quantify the translocation process from the intestinal lumen to the liver.

Pathological increases in bacterial translocation are evidenced in cirrhotic mice, occurring largely independently of the lymphatic route.

This does not exclude the well-known PBT along the lymphatic route in cirrhosis, as demonstrated by us14,41 and multiple other independent investigators.42–44

Herein, we confirm this in BDL mice and extend this observation by demonstrating a particularly pronounced PBT into PPs, which appears to involve mainly myeloid dendritic cells but also represents at least partly a cell-independent passage and translocation process.

However, translocation into the lymphatic system is a physiological event occurring in healthy conditions via a highly orchestrated process at low rates.

In contrast, herein, we show that no bacterial and/or 4 kDA-dextran-translocation is detectable intrahepatically in control and pre-hepatic portal-hypertensive mice.

This strongly argues for a tight sealing and protection of the gut-liver axis from any bacterial translocation in healthy conditions, which is not significantly altered by portal hypertension.

However, in cirrhosis with PBT, the gut-liver axis is markedly “opened” and fueled with bacteria via the intestinal microcirculation and portal-venous route, which seems to represent the predominant route of access to the host.

PARAGRAPH

We chose the distal ileum as the main target site for investigations due to the most drastic increase of bacterial load and the presence of a thinner and more penetrable mucus layer compared to the large intestine.45

Nonetheless, also in the ileum, the mucus layer represents the first line of defense against bacterial translocation with mucus release keeping bacteria at a distance from the epithelium.13

Correspondingly, defects in mucus barrier function result in increased bacterial adhesion to the surface epithelium and increased intestinal mucosal permeability.46,47

Colonization of the gastrointestinal tract with microbial commensals has been reported to impact on the intestinal mucus machinery, as well as vascular development.

It has many crucial roles, including on normal development of the mucus barrier31 and on induction of mucus secretion.

It also leads to an increasing number of GCs via activation of toll-like receptors in the intestinal epithelium by microbial-derived products.48

GCs have been studied in germ-free conditions before and found to be reduced in numbers and smaller in size in the cecum compared to conventionally raised mice.49

Here, we extend this observation for another site, namely small intestine and sDMDM2-gnotobiotic conditions, demonstrating increased total numbers of GCs, particularly mucin-filled GCs, compared to germ-free mice.

Moreover, several members of the microbiota community have been reported to increase Muc2 gene expression in vivo and in vitro and to release the otherwise membrane-anchored MUC2 molecule.50

Here we demonstrate under sDMDM2-gnotobiotic conditions reduced mucus thickness and expression of the main mucus- genes in cirrhotic mice.

This associates with bacterial overgrowth in the inner mucus layer, which is normally sterile, promoting pathological crossing of E. coli into the lamina propria.

Most translocation of living bacteria to the liver is seen in mice with low mucus thickness and cirrhotic mice with translocation to the MLNs, present with a reduction in GC numbers compared to those without bacterial translocation.

Thus, changes in mucus parameters can, at least partly, be explained by the observed reduction in GCs with a particularly pronounced reduction in the number of mucin-filled GCs and concomitant increase in empty GCs in liver cirrhosis under standardized gnotobiotic conditions.

Surprisingly, a lack of luminal intestinal bile induced by short-term BDL in the absence of microbiota failed to impact on GC density.

This hints at the microbiome being responsible for the observed changes in sDMDM2-conditions.

Thus, we analyzed ileal microbial composition in mucus, demonstrating changes in microbial clustering with overgrowth of Enterococcus faecalis in BDL mice.

Considering the mucus-binding as well as mucus degradation capacity of Enterococci,51,52 it is tempting to speculate that this drastic increase in Enterococci might actually contribute to the observed reduction in mucus thickness in these animals.

More interestingly, these data shed new light on the most recent demonstration of Enterococcus overgrowth in gastric acid depleted conditions and associated progression of alcohol-related liver disease.53

Indeed, in conjunction with the observed protection of Muc2-deficient mice from alcohol-related liver disease,54 the mucus niche is a highly attractive target for preventive and/or therapeutic modulation in liver diseases.

However, further studies need to address this, as well as the exact role of bile acids, on the observed changes.

PARAGRAPH

Microbial commensals of the gastrointestinal tract have been implicated in the development of the intricate network of blood capillaries in intestinal villi, at least partly depending on angiogenic factors secreted by Paneth cells.32

More interestingly monocolonization with Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron a common human and mouse gut commensal is enough to promote vascular development.

In line with these results, we have also shown that transient bacterial colonization with the reversible auxotrophic E. coli strain HA107 is enough to induce angiogenic genes and increase vascular density within the intestinal villi.55

As for vascular barrier function, we demonstrate that the microbiome is of rather limited impact.

In fact, germ-free mice present with similar permeation characteristics for small and large-sized molecules as mice with normal gut flora.

However, a modulatory role for microbes and microbial products cannot be excluded considering the observed expedited leakage of pathological sized molecules in BDL mice in germ-free conditions.

This indeed hints towards some protective effects of the microbiome in stabilizing the GVB.

In fact, also for 70 kDA-dextran, resembling albumin in size, extravasation is slower in the presence of a complex microbiome compared to germ-free conditions.

Thus, the microbiome appears to be of major relevance for the mucus machinery but, despite exerting some impact, GVB permeability appears to be relatively unaffected.

PARAGRAPH

Vascular changes in the splanchnic circulation have been characterized intensively in terms of compliance, hemodynamic dysregulation and angiogenesis, but only limited data are available for endothelial permeability.

The newly described GVB is grossly disrupted in cirrhotic mice (BDL, CCl4) with rapid extravasation of large-sized molecules (150 kDA) more than twice the size of albumin.

Concomitantly, enteral loss of albumin is observed in cirrhotic conditions but not in pre-hepatic portal hypertension.

This is in accordance with the lack of interepithelial fluorescence detectable for 70 kDA-FITC-dextran in PVL-mice, considering albumin is 66 kDA in size and known to leak predominantly paracellularly.

The expedited extravasation of large-sized molecules from intestinal capillaries in cirrhotic mice easily explains the well-known edema within the lamina propria, caused by concomitant fluid shifts and increases in interstitial pressures.

Vascular hyperpermeability in cirrhotic mice did associate with augmented PV-1 availability, known as a biomarker for the level of endothelial permeability.56

This is in line with our previous observation of increased expression of PV1 and intestinal endothelial permeability during a high-fat diet and disruption of the GVB.57

The exact mechanisms upregulating PV1-availability in cirrhosis need to be delineated but could involve endothelial growth factor-A (VEGF).

Indeed, PV1 has been reported to be upregulated by VEGF58 and inhibition of PV1 expression resulted in decreased VEGF-induced endothelial permeability of fluorescent tracers, both in vivo and in vitro.59

Considering the well-known increased serum levels of VEGF in experimental cirrhosis, it is tempting to speculate that this contributes to the observed PV1 upregulation.

PARAGRAPH

As for the underlying mechanism of PBT to the liver, we propose that the muco-epithelial and vascular endothelial barrier need to be disrupted simultaneously in order to allow permeation from the lumen into the portal-venous circulation, such as in liver cirrhosis but not in pre-hepatic portal hypertension.

Indeed, portal hypertension per se, in the absence of liver injury, fails to induce alterations in mucus thickness, weight per ileum length, MUC2-expression and GC numbers.

In addition, increased portal pressure alone does not associate with permeation of E. coli trans-mucoepithelially into the lamina propria.

Moreover, although GVB is disrupted to some degree, permeability is limited to small-/medium-sized molecules of up to 70 kDA.

However, in the presence of a second hit known to affect the epithelial barrier (such as a lack of epithelial FXR-signaling), this minor alteration is sufficient to enable some access to the villus microcirculation for molecules that normally do not permeate the vascular endothelium.

Indeed, FxrΔIEC mice per se do not present with either 4 kDA-FITC-dextran or GFP-E.

coli translocation to the liver but, once PPVL is performed and GVB is disrupted, the gut-liver axis is fueled and 4 kDA-FITC and E. coli appear intrahepatically.

PARAGRAPH

Thus, FXR appears to play a central role in the modulation of both barriers, explaining the therapeutic benefit of systemic and/or local intestinal FXR activation established in experimental cirrhosis.

Both FXR-agonists, OCA and Fex abrogated pathological E. coli translocation to the liver, underlining their effect in “sealing” the gut-liver axis.

FXR-agonists have been used before in experimental portal hypertension.15,43,60,61

However, direct assessment of their effectiveness on the gut-liver axis is lacking.

OCA has been reported to lower intrahepatic resistance, ameliorating portal hypertension,60,61 while FXR activation in the small intestine reduces bacterial translocation to MLNs in experimental cirrhosis15,43 and acute cholestasis.62

However, the mode of action in our experiments, as for the gut-liver axis, appears independent from portal hypertension and not influenced by lymphatic drainage.

Hence, overall, we present a new modulatory role of FXR for mucus and GVB affecting the gut-liver axis.

PARAGRAPH

FXR activation by OCA, as well as Fex, increased ileal protein expression of the main TJ proteins (ZO1, occluding, claudin-1, -5) in cirrhotic mice.

This is in line with previous reports demonstrating that FXR activation influences intestinal epithelial cell proliferation and apoptosis,25 increases ileal ZO1-expression15 and exerts potent anti-inflammatory actions in the intestine, stabilizing epithelial integrity.26,63,64

Herein, we report, in addition, that OCA impacted on the mucus machinery by increasing ileal GC numbers in cirrhotic animals to a level similar to control mice.

Moreover, the fact that 3 days after BDL, in absence of liver fibrosis/cirrhosis, mucus thickness is reduced, and the numbers of GCs are decreased, supports a role for bile salts in GC homeostasis.

In conjunction, with the well-known deficiency in luminal availability of bile acids24 and associated reduction in ileal FXR-signaling in cirrhotic rodents,15 it is tempting to speculate that deficient bile acid-induced FXR-signaling could mediate this phenotype.

However, we were unable to detect FXR expression in GCs, suggesting a paracrine mode of action for bile acids, which needs to be delineated in further studies.

PARAGRAPH

On the vascular side, FXR has been shown to be expressed on endothelial cells65 and we have reported previously that specific FXR deletion in endothelial cells disrupts the GVB, leading to liver damage in high-fat diet models.57

Here, we extend these data by demonstrating stabilization of the dysfunctional GVB in cirrhotic animals given the systemically active FXR agonist, OCA.

In contrast, Fex failed to impact on the GVB.

The latter indicates that improvements in each barrier separately can be sufficient to block PBT to the liver.

PARAGRAPH

In summary, the microbiota appears key to mucus- and GC physiology, whereas its impact on GVB function seems rather limited.

Access to the gut-liver axis in healthy conditions, with normal gut flora, is highly regulated and restricted in size and quality.

In contrast, pathological translocation to the liver develops in cirrhosis independently of portal hypertension and the lymphatic route.

This opening of the gut-liver axis associates with mucus- and GVB dysfunction modulated at least partly by FXR.

OCA and Fex both reduce PBT in cirrhosis but acting differently at the muco-epithelial and the vascular endothelial barrier.

SECTION

Financial support

PARAGRAPH

This work was supported by Swiss-National-Fund SNF 310030_152805 to RW and SNF 31003A_163143 to ADG.

SECTION

Conflict of interest

PARAGRAPH

The authors declare no conflicts of interest that pertain to this work.

PARAGRAPH

Please refer to the accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.

SECTION

Authors’ contributions

PARAGRAPH

M.S. ideated and performed the experiments; M.J., D.S., Y.N., S.M., M.H. helped M.S. in the execution of the mouse experiments; B.Y. and L.H. performed microbial analysis; M.R. provided human investigations and administered the informed consents; A.G., M.R., A.A. participated with ideas, results interpretation, and careful reading of the manuscript; R.W. ideated the study, coordinated the work, and wrote the manuscript.