10.1016/j.jhep.2019.01.009

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Low specificity of washout to diagnose hepatocellular carcinoma in nodules showing arterial hyperenhancement in patients with Budd-Chiari syndrome

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Primary Budd-Chiari Syndrome (BCS) is a rare vascular disorder involving hepatic venous outflow impairment at any level between the small hepatic veins and the right atrium.1–4

In Western countries, primary BCS is commonly associated with prothrombotic conditions such as myeloproliferative neoplasms, coagulation disorders of various causes, paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria, antiphospholipid syndrome and Behçet’s disease.

The use of oral contraceptives is frequently associated with BCS, but it seems to act as a co-factor.3,5–7

PARAGRAPH

One of the consequences of chronic BCS is the development of focal liver lesions.

The vast majority are benign and correspond to large regenerative lesions called focal nodular hyperplasia-like (FNH-like) lesions.8

They develop as a consequence of chronic portal blood deprivation and the compensatory increase in the arterial blood supply to the liver parenchyma.8–10

BCS is also a recognized risk factor for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) with an incidence varying from country to country: 6% to 41% of patients with BCS in Japan; 48% of patients in South Africa; and 25% in the US.3,11–13

Thus, it is important to accurately differentiate benign lesions from HCC, as patient management will greatly differ.

From this perspective, imaging, especially MRI, plays an important role as a first non-invasive step in the diagnostic process.

PARAGRAPH

Few studies have reported imaging findings of focal liver lesions in patients with BCS.9,10,14

All have shown that both benign and malignant lesions appear markedly hyperenhanced on contrast-enhanced CT or MRI during the arterial phase.

They have also shown that lesion size, number and serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) level are useful for further characterization.9,10,11,15

PARAGRAPH

In patients with cirrhosis, the classic imaging hallmarks of HCC (i.e. combination of hyperenhancement on arterial phase and washout for lesions greater than 1 cm) on either CT or MRI are sufficient to allow for a non-invasive diagnosis.16,17

The question of whether these imaging criteria might be applied in chronic vascular liver diseases at risk of benign lesions and HCC, such as BCS, remains open.

Indeed, cirrhosis and chronic BCS both share decreased liver perfusion and increased arterial inflow, but liver congestion is a peculiar finding observed in liver venous outflow obstruction and not in cirrhosis.

As liver congestion is seen as persistent and heterogeneous enhancement on contrast-enhanced CT or MRI during portal venous and delayed phases, washout observed in liver lesions may be due to a different mechanism and could therefore be less specific for HCC in that setting.

PARAGRAPH

The aim of this study was to evaluate the diagnostic value of washout for the discrimination between benign and malignant lesions in patients with primary Budd-Chiari syndrome, in order to assess whether the non-invasive imaging criteria for HCC validated in patients with cirrhosis can be applied in this setting.

SECTION

Materials and methods

SECTION

Patient population

PARAGRAPH

This single-center retrospective study, including chart review, was approved by our institutional review board and the requirement for written informed consent was waived.

All patients admitted to our tertiary center for vascular liver disorders (Beaujon University Hospital, Clichy, France) between 2000 and 2016 with a diagnosis of primary BCS were retrieved from our prospective electronic database.

Inclusion criteria were i) the diagnosis of acute, subacute or chronic BCS, and ii) initial diagnosis and follow-up including contrast-enhanced MRI.

BCS was defined as hepatic venous outflow impairment at any level between the small hepatic veins and the right atrium.4

The date of the diagnosis of BCS was that of the first imaging examination demonstrating obstructed venous outflow.

PARAGRAPH

For all patients, all available MRI examinations were screened by 2 abdominal radiologists (MVW and MR) and only those showing at least 1 focal liver lesion (defined as a round, well-circumscribed lesion greater than 5 mm in diameter seen on unenhanced or contrast-enhanced sequ ences) were retained.

Patients who had no focal liver lesion on initial or follow-up MRI were excluded.

Patients who only had benign lesions with less than 12 months of follow-up were also excluded (Fig. 1).

Demographic, clinical, laboratory, and outcome data were retrieved from patient medical records.

Patients were tested for prothrombotic factors such as myeloproliferative neoplasm associated with the JAK-2 mutation, paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria, coagulation disorders, antiphospholipid syndrome, and Behçet’s disease.

Oral contraception and pregnancy were considered thrombotic risk factors.

A history of endovascular treatment (stenting of hepatic veins or transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt [TIPS]) was also recorded.

PARAGRAPH

The final study group included 49 patients with a mean age of 35 ± 12 years [range 13–70] (34 women (69%) 34 ± 12 years old [13–70]; 15 men (31%) 38 ± 11 years old [18–59]).

SECTION

MRI protocol

PARAGRAPH

Patients were explored using various MRI scanners because some were referred to our center with their own MR examinations.

Thirty-six patients had at least 1 MRI performed in our institution.

In our institution, MRI was performed on a 1.5 T clinical MR system until December 2012 and on a 3 T clinical MR system thereafter (Intera, Philips Medical System, Best, The Netherlands) using a phased-array body coil.

All patients included in the study population had a standard liver MR exam, including the following sequences acquired in the axial plane: a respiratory-triggered fat-suppressed fast spin-echo T2-weighted sequence, an in- and opposed-phase gradient-echo T1-weighted sequence, a free breathing diffusion-weighted sequence with a b value of >400 s/mm,2 a fat-suppressed 3D gradient-echo T1 weighted sequence, before and after intravenous injection of extracellular gadolinium chelates (blinded for review) at a dose of 0.1 mmol per kilogram of body weight followed by a 20 ml bolus of saline, obtained at the arterial (bolus triggering), portal (50 s), and delayed (3 min) phases.

Contrast agent and saline were injected with a power injector (Medrad; Pittsburgh, PA).

SECTION

Image analysis

PARAGRAPH

MRI examinations with focal liver lesions were retrospectively reviewed in consensus by 2 abdominal radiologists (with 4 years and 10 years of expertise) on a picture archive and communication system workstation (Carestream Health, Rochester, NY).

Readers were aware of the diagnosis of BCS but blinded to the nature of the liver lesions, and patient clinical and biological data.

PARAGRAPH

Readers recorded the following items: i) number of liver lesions; ii) lesion location according to the Couinaud classification; iii) largest diameter of the lesion (in mm); iv) signal intensity on T1-weighted images; v) signal intensity on T2-weighted images; vi) signal intensity on high b-value diffusion-weighted images, vii) signal intensity on arterial phase, portal venous, and delayed phase images (for items 4 to 7, each lesion was compared to the surrounding liver parenchyma and categorized as hypo, iso, or hyperintense when they respectively showed lower, similar, or higher signal intensity than the liver); viii) peripheral rim enhancement (present or absent) defined as peripheral marked enhancement with relative central lower enhancement; ix) fat component (present or absent) defined as signal drop in the lesion on opposed-phase T1-weighted gradient recalled echo (GRE) when compared to in-phase T1-weighted GRE images; x) hepatic steatosis (present or absent) defined as signal drop of the liver on opposed-phase T1-weighted GRE when compared to in-phase T1-weighted GRE images.

In patients with more than 10 liver lesions, only the largest 10 were included in the analysis.

Lesions showing signal hyperintensity on arterial phase images were considered as having arterial phase hyperenhancement (APHE).

For lesions showing signal hyperintensity on precontrast T1-weighted sequences, APHE was assessed on subtracted images.

A “washout appearance” was considered to be present if a lesion showed hypointensity, in part or in the totality of the lesion, on the portal venous and/or delayed phase compared to the surrounding liver parenchyma according to recent guidelines.16,17

A third reader performed an independent read to assess inter-reader agreement for washout.

SECTION

Final diagnosis

PARAGRAPH

Lesions were diagnosed on the basis of histopathologic analysis of specimens obtained by surgical resection or percutaneous biopsy, or on the basis of clinical and biologic data combined with a minimum of 12 months follow-up.

Malignant cells at histologic examination, serum AFP level greater than 250 ng/ml, or both, enabled the diagnosis of HCC.

Indications for focal liver lesion biopsy were as i) focal lesion associated with an AFP serum level >15 ng/ml; ii) lesion modification, i.e. appearance of previously absent washout, or ≥50% size increase in ≤6 months; iii) lesion >10 mm showing arterial phase hyperenhancement and washout and ancillary imaging features, especially mild-moderate signal hyperintensity on T2-weighted images or signal hyperintensity on high b-value diffusion-weighted images.

The absence of malignant cells with findings suggestive of regenerative lesions at histologic examination, or no change or disappearance of the lesions with serum AFP levels lower than 15 ng/ml during follow-up,11 were the criteria used for the diagnosis of a benign lesion.

SECTION

Statistical analysis

PARAGRAPH

Categorical data were expressed as frequencies and percentages, and continuous variables were expressed as means and standard deviations, or medians and ranges, as suitable.

A Fisher’s exact test or a Chi-square test was used for comparison of frequencies.

The Student’s t test or Mann-Whitney U test were used to compare continuous variables according to the distribution of data.

Inter-reader agreement for washout identification was assessed with kappa coefficients (0.00–0.20 indicated slight agreement; 0.21–0.40, fair agreement; 0.41–0.60, moderate agreement; 0.61–0.80, substantial agreement; and 0.81–1.00, almost perfect agreement).

A p value of 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant and all tests were 2-sided.

All analyses were performed using the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) software (version 23.0.

SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL).

SECTION

Results

SECTION

Patient population and lesions

PARAGRAPH

Characteristics of the 49 patients included in the study are presented in Table 1.

We included 15 men (31%) and 34 women (69%), with a mean age of 35 ± 12 years (range 13–70).

PARAGRAPH

The etiology of BCS was identified in 34 patients (69%) with a predominance of myeloproliferative neoplasms (n = 22, 45%) and coagulation disorders (n = 12, 24%).

Five patients (10%) had several causes of BCS.

Fourteen (41%) female patients used oral contraception and 18 had a history of at least 1 pregnancy.

Nine patients (18%) had associated inferior vena cava thrombosis and 3 (6%) had associated portal vein thrombosis.

Three patients (6%) had a history of hepatic vein stenting and 21 patients (43%) had undergone TIPS placement.

PARAGRAPH

A total of 253 focal liver lesions were analyzed, with a mean diameter of 12 ± 7 mm (range 5–55).

Fourteen patients (29%) had a solitary lesion, 23/49 patients (47%) had 2–9 lesions, and 12/49 patients (24%) had 10 lesions or more.

Thirty-eight patients had only benign lesions, 7 had only HCC lesions and 4 had both types of lesion.

Focal lesions were located in all liver segments but were most frequent in the right liver (n = 170, 67%).

PARAGRAPH

A total of 15 patients underwent liver biopsy, 13 for the characterization of a focal liver lesion suspected of being an HCC, and 2 as part of the diagnostic work-up for BCS.

Details are provided in Table 2.

Briefly, 3 patients had liver cirrhosis, and others had various degrees of fibrosis deposition.

Diagnosis of HCC was confirmed in 10/13 patients (77%).

In the 3 remaining patients, the biopsied lesion corresponded to regenerative nodules (n = 2), or atypical focal nodular hyperplasia (n = 1).

One patient with an AFP serum level >15 ng/ml did not undergo biopsy (AFP = 25 ng/ml) because focal lesions were all <10 mm in size and did not harbor washout.

No lesion initially considered as benign was diagnosed as being an HCC.

SECTION

Imaging features of focal liver lesions

PARAGRAPH

The median time delay between initial diagnosis and depiction of liver lesions was 10 months [range 0–120] in the entire population (median 9.5 months [0–103] vs. 40 [0–120] in patients with only benign lesions, and with HCC, respectively, p = 0.126).

PARAGRAPH

Imaging features of focal liver lesions are provided (Table 3).

Briefly, most lesions showed signal hyperintensity on T1-weighted MR images (n = 203, 80%).

The signal on T2-weighted MRI was more variable, with a predominance of signal hypointensity (n = 144, 57%).

All but 5 lesions showed APHE (97%).

Washout appearance was noted in 33 (13%) and 68 (31%) lesions on portal venous and delayed phase images, respectively.

Readers agreed in 236/253 nodules (93.4%) regarding the presence or absence of washout.

The inter-reader agreement for washout was almost perfect, with a kappa value of 0.85 ± 0.04.

Authors always agreed regarding the washout of HCC, and discrepancies all belonged to the group of benign lesions.

Patients were followed up for a median period of 62 months [range 12–162] during which 77 benign lesions (32%) disappeared.

SECTION

Features of benign regenerative lesions

PARAGRAPH

Characteristics of benign lesions are provided (Table 3B).

Overall, 38 patients (78%) developed 241 benign regenerative lesions.

The diagnosis of benign lesions was established by biopsy in 3 patients (Table 2).

These patients were biopsied because lesions were suspected of being HCC (significant size growth and washout).

The diagnosis of benignity was based on imaging follow-up in the remaining patients.

No patients initially diagnosed as having only benign lesions were finally diagnosed as having HCC.

The mean diameter of lesions was 11 ± 5 mm [5–39].

Most patients (n = 21/38, 55%) had between 2 and 9 lesions.

Lesions were solitary in 7 patients (18%).

The majority of benign regenerative lesions showed signal hyperintensity (n = 200, 83%) on fat-suppressed T1-weighted images, and signal hypointensity on T2-weighted images (n = 141, 58%) (Fig. 2).

APHE was seen in almost all lesions (n = 238/241, 99%).

Twenty-six lesions (11%) showed washout on portal venous phase images, and 57 lesions showed washout on delayed phase images (28% of 207 lesions with acquired delayed phase) (Fig. 3).

Overall, 43/241 benign lesions (18%) were greater than 1 cm in size and showed both APHE and washout.

During follow-up, 77/241 lesions (32%) disappeared in 21/38 patients and 28/38 patients (74%) developed new lesions.

SECTION

HCC imaging features

PARAGRAPH

A diagnosis of HCC was established for 12 lesions in 11 patients (23%).

Most patients (n = 7/12, 64%) had a solitary lesion, 2 (18%) had between 2 and 9 lesions, and 2 (18%) had 10 lesions or more (including HCC and benign lesions).

HCC was confirmed by means of histopathologic examination in 10/11 (91%) patients.

In 1 patient the diagnosis of HCC was based on the development of a new lesion together with an elevated serum AFP level greater than 250 ng/ml.

PARAGRAPH

Lesion characteristics are summarized in Table 3B. Mean lesion diameter was 32 ± 16 mm [14–55].

Signal intensity on T1-weighted and T2-weighted MR images was variable, with a predominance of signal hypointensity on T1-weighted MR (n = 7/12, 58%) and signal hyperintensity on T2-weighted MR images (n = 7/12, 58%).

Ten HCCs (83%) showed APHE, and washout was observed in 7 (58%) and 11 (92%) HCCs on portal venous and delayed phase images, respectively (Fig. 4).

Overall, 9/12 (75%) HCC were greater than 1 cm in size and showed both APHE and washout.

SECTION

Focus on lesions greater than 1 cm showing both APHE and washout

PARAGRAPH

A total of 52/143 lesions greater than 1 cm in size with APHE showed washout, including 9 HCC (17%) and 43 benign lesions (83%).

Therefore the specificity of washout for the diagnosis of HCC was 67% (95% CI 59–75%) in this subgroup.

After exclusion of the 3 cirrhotic patients from the analysis, the specificity remained unchanged (data not shown).

Characteristics of lesions (and corresponding patients) are provided (Table 4).

PARAGRAPH

In this subgroup of 52 lesions, signal hypointensity on T1-weighted images was observed significantly more frequently in HCC (n = 6/9, 67%) than benign lesions (n = 0, 0%, p <0.001).

Signal hyperintensity on T2-weighted images was more frequent in HCC (77% vs. 11% in benign lesions, p <0.001) and on high b-value diffusion-weighted images (88% vs. 15%, p <0.001).

Among the 21 patients with at least 1 lesion greater than 1 cm showing both APHE and washout, the serum AFP level was >15 ng/ml in 1/12 (8%) patients with benign lesions and 6/9 (67%) patients with HCC (p <0.001).

PARAGRAPH

The diagnostic performance of adding several ancillary features for the diagnosis of HCC in lesions greater than 1 cm in size is provided (Table 5).

The best specificity (100% [95% CI 92–100%]) was reached by adding hypointensity on T1-w images to the classic imaging hallmarks of HCC, and the highest sensitivity was obtained with hyperintensity on high b-value DWI (88% [95% CI 76–94%]).

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

Our study confirms on a large scale (250 lesions in 49 patients with primary BCS) that MRI is helpful for the differentiation between HCC and benign regenerative lesions.

Indeed, if both showed APHE in the vast majority of cases, several features significantly differed between them, particularly the rate of washout appearance.

Yet, if washout was seen in most HCC as expected, it was also observed in 29% of benign lesions, and up to 18% of benign lesions were greater than 1 cm and showed both APHE and washout.

This meant that the classic imaging hallmarks of HCC had an unacceptably low specificity for the non-invasive diagnosis of HCC in patients with BSC.

Nevertheless, ancillary imaging features – such as signal intensity on T1 weighted images – or tumor markers resulted in an improved diagnostic performance in lesions greater than 1 cm.

PARAGRAPH

BCS is a rare hepatic disorder characterized by obstruction of the hepatic venous system by primary hepatic vein thrombosis or by primary thrombosis of the inferior vena cava at its hepatic portion.

Cazal-Hatem et al. have shown that a marked increase in hepatic arterial perfusion is observed in patients with long-standing BCS,8 similar to the effect of “hepatic arterial buffer response” described by Lautt et al. in animals.18

This triggers the development of chronic nodular regenerative hyperplasia,1,8 further leading to large regenerative lesions showing predominantly arterial uptake.

This is in accordance with the pathogenesis of unique focal nodular hyperplasia historically proposed by Wanless et al.,19 and explains why the vast majority of the lesions analyzed in the present study showed hyperenhancement in the arterial phase, in line with previous reports.9,10,14,20

According to this hypothesis, the pathogenesis of benign lesions is different from lesion formation in cirrhosis and is directly attributable to chronic liver congestion.

Importantly, HCC also shows hyperenhancement in the vast majority of patients.9,11,12

Therefore, differentiation between malignant and benign lesions requires the use of other features.

PARAGRAPH

From a clinical and biological point of view, patients with benign lesions significantly differed from those with HCC regarding serum AFP levels and age.

The negative predictive value of the cut-off of 15 ng/ml for AFP proposed by Moucari et al. was efficient since only 1 patient with a benign lesion had a higher value.

Male gender and inferior vena cava obstruction, also reported by Moucari et al. as risk factors for HCC, were not associated with this diagnosis in the current population, even though the frequency of the latter was higher in patients with HCC.11

Yet, and as stressed by Moucari et al., inferior vena cava obstruction may be more a marker of long-standing BCS than a risk factor for HCC per se.11

As a consequence, patient characteristics are insufficient, and imaging is required for the differential diagnosis.

PARAGRAPH

Imaging features of regenerative lesions that develop in BCS have been well documented:9,10,14 as in the present study, most appear hyperintense on T1-weighted MR images, and hypointense on T2-weighted MR images.

Classically, the washout appearance is associated with the diagnosis of HCC, and regenerative lesions are expected to present with contrast fading (hyperenhancement and progressive disappearance), or marked and persistent contrast uptake.9,10,14

This is derived from the European Association for the Study of the Liver (EASL) and the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases (AASLD) guidelines for the diagnosis of HCC that recommend that every lesion greater than 1 cm with arterial hyperenhancement and washout on dynamic contrast-enhanced imaging should be considered as HCC.16,17

Yet, these recommendations are only validated in patients with cirrhosis.15,17

Whether or not they can be transposed to other clinical contexts, and especially to patients with vascular disorders of the liver, remains unclear.

Our results show that these recommendations cannot be followed in this setting.

First, 25% of HCC did not show this feature.

The limited sensitivity of washout on the portal venous phase was reported by Moucari et al.11 Yet, sensitivity is not the aim of imaging as a non-invasive diagnostic tool.

As a matter of fact, such low sensitivity is also observed in patients with small HCC in the setting of cirrhosis.21–23

More important is the specificity offered by the non-invasive criteria.

Since close to 20% of benign lesions were greater than 1 cm and showed arterial hyperenhancement and washout appearance on portal venous and/or delayed phase images, the resulting specificity of the classic hallmarks for the non-invasive diagnosis of HCC was unacceptably low.

Few patients were pathologically diagnosed with cirrhosis in our series.

Yet, and noticeably, this was rare, and analyses performed after exclusion of these patients showed that results remained unchanged.

Moucari et al. have suggested that washout in HCC in the context of BCS might also be explained by the venous congestion within the liver parenchyma.11

We hypothesize that liver congestion might also, and more importantly, explain the high prevalence of washout in benign lesions.

PARAGRAPH

Interestingly, other imaging features were shown to be helpful in the differentiation of malignant and benign lesions.

HCC more frequently showed signal hypointensity on T1-w images, hyperintensity on T2-w and diffusion-weighted images, capsule and fat content, and were larger than benign lesions.

This is in line with previous reports by Vilgrain et al.9 and Brancatelli et al.10 Associating these features helped improve the diagnostic performance of imaging.

Therefore, carefully assessing the presence of these features is of the utmost importance.

PARAGRAPH

Aside from its retrospective design, this study suffers from several limitations.

First, the population was not large.

This is explained by our inclusion criteria, since we focused on patients with primary BCS with focal liver lesions, and with baseline and follow-up MR imaging.

Yet, the population is consecutive, well characterized, and includes a large number of lesions.

Moreover, it is representative of a Western BCS cohort, with a preponderance of women, and a high frequency of myeloproliferative neoplasms.11

Second, we did not use MR hepatospecific contrast agent.

Most patients were diagnosed before the large dissemination of hepatospecific contrast agents.

We also felt it was important to analyze these patients with extracellular MR contrast agents.

We acknowledge that the choice of the contrast agent in vascular liver diseases is an important question since few case reports have been published thus far.24–26

This question is currently under investigation in our department.

Third, the imaging ancillary features we used favoring the diagnosis of HCC were derived from those included in the LI-RADS system.27

Yet, they would need to be validated prospectively in patients with BCS.

Finally, the definition of washout was purely qualitative, which may result in subjectivity and inter-reader variability.

This variability has been acknowledged in previous publications.28

Yet, this definition follows the recommendations of international guidelines.16,17

Moreover, if one could hypothesize that a quantitative definition, in line with that proposed by Chang et al.,29 would result in more reproducible identification of washout, an article by Liu et al. showed that a purely quantitative definition of washout correlated well with radiologists' assessments of enhancement pattern of lesions but resulted in a lower positive predictive value than visual assessment.30

Moreover, the quantitative approach may miss a partial washout due to averaging of the signal intensity in the lesion.

This suggests that, at present, a quantitative method cannot replace qualitative analysis.

PARAGRAPH

In conclusion, MR imaging is helpful for the differentiation between HCC and benign liver lesions in patients with BCS.

The value of washout appearance is limited since it was observed in a significant proportion of benign lesions greater than 1 cm, leading to an unacceptably low specificity for the diagnosis of HCC.

Therefore, the non-invasive diagnostic criteria proposed by the AASLD and EASL for cirrhotic patients cannot be applied in this clinical setting.

Other imaging features and patient characteristics should be carefully analyzed, especially lesion signal intensity on precontrast sequences and serum AFP levels, because their combination with classical imaging features increases the diagnostic confidence.

SECTION

Financial support

PARAGRAPH

The authors received no financial support to produce this manuscript.

SECTION

Conflict of interest

PARAGRAPH

The authors declare no conflicts of interest that pertain to this work.

PARAGRAPH

Please refer to the accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.

SECTION

Authors’ contributions

PARAGRAPH

Study design: M van Wettere, M Ronot, V Vilgrain.

Data collection: M van Wettere, M Ronot, A Plessier, A Payancé, PE Rautou, D Cazal-Hatem.

Data analysis: M van Wettere, M Ronot, O Bruno, D Cazal-Hatem.

Study coordination: M Ronot.

Logistic support: M Ronot V Vilgrain.

Manuscript drafting: M van Wettere, Y Purcell, M Ronot.

Manuscript revision: All authors.

Manuscript final approval: All authors.