10.1016/j.jhep.2018.04.013

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Liver stiffness measurement in the primary care setting detects high rates of advanced fibrosis and predicts liver-related events in hepatitis C

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Chronic hepatitis C (CHC) is a major public health issue with an estimated global prevalence greater than 71 million cases and over 1.75 million individuals infected annually.1

Together with chronic hepatitis B (CHB), CHC is accountable for over 1.34 million deaths worldwide annually, being the second highest cause of death from communicable diseases and ranked seventh for all-cause mortality.2

The rapidly increasing rates of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in the developed world have largely been attributed to increased rates of CHC infection since 1975.3

Furthermore, early identification of cirrhosis is associated with improved patient outcomes and HCC survival.4–6

PARAGRAPH

In Australia an estimated 230,000 individuals are living with CHC.

One-quarter or 55,000 of this population reside in the state of Victoria (over a geographical area of 237,000 km2).7

Prior estimates in this population suggest that 7–8% of these individuals have cirrhosis.3,8

While 75% of patients with CHC have been identified following the adoption of screening guidelines,9 50–70% of these patients are managed solely in primary care.10

Despite free universal access, there is a relative lack of engagement in specialist care.

The reason for this is multifactorial and includes distance, long waiting list times, a perception of toxic treatment regimens and stigma from health service providers.

PARAGRAPH

In order to reach the World Health Organization’s goal of CHC elimination,11 the engagement of non-specialist physicians in CHC treatment and management is paramount.

Australia has already demonstrated a rapid uptake of direct-acting antiviral (DAA) therapy through the unique expanded role of primary care, with 19% of treatment initiated by primary care physicians.12

With increased numbers of patients with CHC treated in the community setting, it is imperative to identify those individuals most at risk of liver-related morbidity and mortality and institute appropriate interventions.

As many patients with chronic liver disease remain asymptomatic until the development of clinically significant portal hypertension, it is a challenge for primary care providers to identify those requiring further specialist input and HCC screening.

PARAGRAPH

Liver stiffness measurement (LSM) may be a suitable screening tool to detect individuals at risk for HCC and liver decompensation in the community setting.

It is well validated for the detection of advanced fibrosis and cirrhosis in CHC,13–20 with recognised pre-determined cut-off values.21,22

The use of LSM may go beyond determination of fibrosis stage with increasing evidence supporting its role in predicting liver-related events (decompensation, HCC and mortality).23–25

However, the use of LSM has been concentrated in tertiary and specialist centres rather than in primary care.

The primary aim of this study was to estimate the prevalence of advanced fibrosis in a community CHC population, as determined by LSM.

Exploratory endpoints were to identify CHC sub-populations where fibrosis screening would be most beneficial; compare the prevalence of advanced fibrosis between community and hospital cohorts; establish a well-defined longitudinal cohort to explore the power of LSM in the prediction of liver-related events and ascertain optimal thresholds for identification of those at highest risk.

SECTION

Patients and methods

PARAGRAPH

Between October 2014 and December 2016, consecutive patients were prospectively recruited through 21 primary care practices within metropolitan and regional Victoria, Australia.

Sites were identified by high volume referral patterns to tertiary centres, identification of high case volume sites by government primary health networks, primary care education sessions, advertisement through hepatitis C support networks and identification of prior interferon treatment sites.

Inclusion criteria included: age 18–80 years, with evidence of CHC as defined by positive PCR for RNA for at least six months.

Patients were excluded if they had a history of recent specialist input (within the preceding 18 months) or current/previous diagnosis of HCC.

Patients meeting inclusion criteria were identified by their primary care providers from electronic or paper medical records and invited to participate in the study.

Following verbal consent, letters of appointment via mail with subsequent phone-call reminders were issued.

Recruited patients gave written and informed consent at the time of initial assessment.

The project was approved through the local Human Ethics Committee in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.

In accordance with manufacturing recommendations for the use of Fibroscan®; pregnant individuals, and those with an implantable cardiac device were excluded.

PARAGRAPH

All patients underwent clinical examination, biochemical, virological and LSM assessment on the same day.

These assessments were completed by one of two hepatologists trained in the use of transient elastography with a minimum of 500 supervised procedures.

Demographic, anthropometric and clinical data were collected by standardized questionnaire.

Alcohol intake was quantified via the AUDIT-C questionnaire.26

At-risk alcohol use was defined as greater than 140 g/week in both men and women.27,28

The presence of the metabolic syndrome was estimated according to the AHA/NHLBI joint statement29 corrected for patient ethnicity and gender.

LSM was obtained following a minimum of two hours of fasting using Fibroscan 402® with either the M or XL probe as determined by skin to capsule depth (SCD) and manufacturer specification.

Optimal probe position and SCD were determined by B mode ultrasound (KaiXin KX5600®).

A valid assessment was defined as a minimum of ten successful readings with a success rate greater than 60% and interquartile range (IQR)/median <30%.

PARAGRAPH

Pre-defined cut-offs of 8.0 kPa and 12.5 kPa were selected to represent thresholds for the diagnosis of significant fibrosis (greater than Metavir F2) and advanced fibrosis or cirrhosis (Metavir F3/F4) respectively.

These thresholds were selected on the basis of prior community-based healthy population screening studies,30 meta-analysis of transient elastography performance22 and current Australian recommendations for the use of LSM in the assessment of viral hepatitis.31,32

All individuals were offered additional 2D ultrasound assessment.

Individuals with an LSM >8.0 kPa were referred to specialist centres for further assessment and management.

From March 2016, individuals with CHC were eligible for primary care provider CHC treatment in Australia following the listing of DAA therapy on the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme.

Those at low risk of cirrhosis (LSM <12.5 kPa) were able to have therapy solely in primary care, while those with possible cirrhosis (LSM ≥12.5 kPa) were referred to specialist centres.

Follow-up data was collected from primary care, tertiary care, private pathology and radiological records on a six-monthly basis.

Consent was obtained for future linkage to cancer and death registries to monitor for the development of HCC and survival.

PARAGRAPH

The primary outcome assessed was the prevalence of advanced fibrosis/cirrhosis, as defined by LSM ≥12.5 kPa, in a community-based CHC cohort.

Sample size calculation indicated that a minimum of 553 individuals were required at an estimated prevalence of cirrhosis of 10%, with a precision of 2.5% at a confidence interval of 95%.33,34

Secondary outcomes analysed included predictors of elevated LSM; the rate and predictors of liver-related events (decompensation, liver-related mortality and HCC development); and optimal LSM threshold to predict liver-related events in a cohort of community managed CHC.

PARAGRAPH

To examine for ascertainment bias, the community cohort (cCHC) was compared to a control hospital cohort (hCHC) of consecutively recruited newly referred patients with CHC to one tertiary centre (Eastern Health).

These referral pathways included intra-hospital and open access primary care referrals at providers discretion.

This control cohort underwent identical assessments to the community-based cohort.

The sample size required was 139 patients in each cohort to determine a difference in the prevalence of advanced fibrosis/cirrhosis, based on an estimated prevalence of 10% and α = 0.05.

SECTION

Statistical analyses

PARAGRAPH

Baseline descriptive continuous data was expressed as means for parametric and medians for non-parametric variables.

Categorical variables were described as frequencies and percentages.

Differences between groups were assessed using Mann-Whitney t test or Student's t test where appropriate.

Chi-square test was used for categorical data.

ANOVA or Kruskal-Wallis test was used to determine statistical differences between multiple groups for parametric and non-parametric data respectively.

For all comparisons, statistical significance was determined at the 0.05 level.

Binary logistic analysis allowed for assessment of factors associated with the development of elevated LSM.

Cox-regression analysis was used to determine the impact of variables on the development of liver-related events.

Variables reaching statistical significance (p <0.05) were considered for inclusion into the logistic multivariate analysis.

Statistical analysis was performed with SPSS software version 24 (IBM SPSS Statistics for Windows, IBM Corp Armonk, NY).

SECTION

Results

PARAGRAPH

From October 2014 to December 2016, 1,134 community patients from 21 primary care practices were invited to participate.

Patients were recruited from an estimated catchment area of 84,710 km2.

Ninety-five percent of individuals were recruited from a region of 5,001 km2, representing an estimated population source of 16,000 with CHC managed solely in primary care based on prior modelling.9

Approximately 24.3% (n = 275) failed to attend the initial assessment.

These individuals were younger (p = 0.037) but otherwise did not differ significantly from the study group.

Overall, 859 patients were recruited and assessed.

Seventy-nine patients were excluded from analysis because of failure to meet inclusion criteria or inability to obtain biochemical or LSM assessment (Fig. 1).

A total of 780 CHC community patients had complete data available for analysis (Table 1).

This cohort represents 4.8% of the estimated CHC population in the catchment area solely managed in primary care.

Fifteen individuals were diagnosed with CHC and CHB coinfection.

Liver stiffness assessment was performed using the M probe in 93.3% (n = 728) and the XL probe in 6.7% (n = 52) of the community, with a 0.3% rate of procedural failure.

The hCHC numbered 272 participants with an additional 65 failing to attend assessment (19.3% vs. 24.3% cCHC p = 0.065).

Eighty-four percent of the hCHC were referred by primary care providers.

Only 3.3% of the hCHC were identified as potentially cirrhotic on the referral with 66.5% of consultations requested for CHC treatment.

SECTION

Community cohort

PARAGRAPH

The community cohort was predominantly male (70.9% [Table 1]) with a median age of 43 years (IQR 36–50 years) with a duration of infection of 14.5 years (±8.7 years).

In this cohort, the median LSM was 6.9 kPa (IQR 5.3–10.4 kPa [Fig. 2]) with an LSM <8.0 kPA, 8.0≤ LSM <12.5 kPa and LSM ≥12.5 kPa observed in 459 (58.9%), 192 (24.6%), 129 (16.5%), respectively (Fig. 3).

The distribution of LSM was consistent between the types of recruitment sites involved (opioid substitution clinics, general medical practice, mixed opioid/general medicine practices and rural locations [Fig. S1]).

Prior utilization of medical resources was low, with 35.7% having routine biochemical testing within the last 12 months and 54.8% in the last 24 months.

This pattern was mirrored in the numbers of radiological evaluations, 34.3% having a prior hepatic ultrasound and only 9.4% within the last six months.

PARAGRAPH

Baseline ultrasound was requested in all participants; however, only 312 (40.0%) completed this.

The uptake was higher in those at risk of advanced fibrosis or cirrhosis (LSM ≥12.5 kPa), with 84.5% completing further radiological assessment.

LSM identified 17.3% of those at risk of advanced fibrosis/cirrhosis who on biochemical scores (aspartate aminotransferase to platelet ratio index/fibrosis 4 index), clinical or ultrasound assessment would have been misclassified.

In those with an intermediate LSM (8≤ LSM <12.5), 18.8% (n = 36) had no biochemical evidence of active liver disease (alanine aminotransferase [ALT], aspartate aminotransferase, gamma glutamyltransferase, bilirubin, albumin, platelet count and alkaline phosphatase within normal laboratory range).

Likewise, 8.5% with an LSM ≥12.5 kPa had no biochemical evidence of portal hypertension or active liver disease (platelets <150 × 109/L, albumin <34 g/L, abnormality of liver function).

Nine additional patients in the cCHC were classified as cirrhotic on imaging criteria in the absence of LSM ≥12.5 kPa (all LSM >8.0 kPa).

Eight liver biopsies were undertaken at the discretion of the treating specialist with concordance with LSM fibrosis assessment in 88%.

SECTION

Comparison of community and hospital cohorts

PARAGRAPH

Notably, there was no difference in median LSM between the cCHC and hCHC cohorts (6.9 kPa vs. 6.8 kPa p = 0.409 [Fig. 2]) and the rates of LSM ≥12.5 kPa were not significantly different between the cCHC (16.5%) and hCHC cohorts (20.2% p = 0.169 [Fig. 3]).

Compared to the hospital cohort, cCHC were less likely to consume alcohol at high risk levels (p = 0.020), more likely to have a significant smoking history (>15 pack year history p <0.001) and had lower rates of any prior specialist input (29.9% vs. 40.8% p = 0.001).

The distribution of genotype was similar between both cohorts (Table 1).

The cCHC were more likely to identify intravenous drug use as the likely source of infection (94.7% vs. hCHC 69.4%; p <0.001) and be actively involved in opiate replacement therapy (73.0% vs. hCHC 11.7%; p <0.001).

SECTION

Predictors of advanced fibrosis (LSM ≥12.5 kPa)

PARAGRAPH

Increasing age, elevated body mass index (BMI), fasting blood sugar level, waist circumference, the metabolic syndrome, at-risk alcohol use and elevated ALT were predictors of elevated LSM on univariate analysis (Table 2).

Cannabis use was negatively correlated and associated with a trend toward lower at-risk alcohol use (36.8% vs. 42.9%; p = 0.084).

On multivariate analysis only at-risk alcohol use (odds ratio [OR] 2.13; p <0.001), advancing age (OR 1.07; p <0.001), BMI (OR 1.13; p = 0.001) and ALT ≥2x upper limit of normal (OR 3.06; p <0.001) were independent predictors of an elevated LSM.

There was a clear increase in the prevalence of elevated LSM when the cohort was classified by age (Fig. 4).

Only 8.4% of those under the age of 40 years had an LSM ≥12.5 kPa.

This was in comparison to 25% in those aged greater than 50 years and 42% of those in their 60 s (Fig. 4).

Advancing BMI was associated with increased rates of elevated LSM.

While the majority of individuals with an LSM ≥12.5 kPa (62.1%) had a BMI ≤30 kg/m2, the prevalence of LSM ≥12.5 kPa more than doubled when BMI was ≥30 kg/m2 (12.4% vs. 31.1%; p <0.001).

A BMI ≥35 kg/m2 was observed in 4.2% of our study population, 37.5% of whom had an LSM ≥12.5 kPa.

While CHC genotype was not predictive of elevated LSM on regression analysis, it was observed that genotype 3 represented 51.2% of cases with LSM ≥12.5 kPa while accounting for 46.2% of infections (Fig. 5).

SECTION

Referral outcomes and significant events

PARAGRAPH

Follow-up data was available on 81.5% of participants with a median follow-up of 15.2 months (IQR 9.6–21.8).

Seven percent of those with LSM ≥12.5 kPa were lost to follow-up.

Following the initial community-based assessment, 233 patients met criteria for further evaluation at a tertiary centre.

This included 89 patients with 8.0 kPa≤ LSM <12.5 kPa who were referred for CHC treatment consideration prior to approval of community DAA therapy in March 2016.

Fifteen individuals were referred for dual infection (CHC/CHB).

The remainder comprised 129 patients with LSM ≥12.5 kPa.

Tertiary assessment was completed by 128 participants (54.9%).

Antiviral therapy has been started in a total of 421 patients.

One hundred and sixty-nine commenced in specialist care and 252 in primary care.

PARAGRAPH

During longitudinal follow-up of the cCHC cohort, 12 individuals (9.3% of those with LSM ≥12.5 kPa) developed liver-related events (Table 3).

Of these, three were diagnosed with HCC through surveillance in the follow-up period (baseline LSM 26.0, 24.0 and 50.5 kPa).

One liver-related death occurred secondary to hepatorenal syndrome in the setting of HCC.

An additional four patients were diagnosed with HCC in hCHC (LSM 27.7/22.8/21.3/7.5 kPa) on surveillance ultrasound.

Of the HCC detected, 85.7% (6/7) were in an early curable stage (Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer [BCLC] 0 or A), the other was BCLC stage B. Of all participants with an LSM ≥12.5 kPa or radiological diagnosis of cirrhosis, the prevalence of HCC was 3.6% (cCHC 2.2% vs. hCHC 7.1%; p = 0.090).

Six additional malignancies were detected during the study period; one cholangiocarcinoma, two colorectal cancers, two lymphomas and one non-small cell lung cancer.

Nine additional deaths occurred, three secondary to extrahepatic malignancy, two suicides, two overdoses and one unclassified.

Fourteen individuals were hospitalized for non-liver-related events.

Our preliminary follow-up data in cCHC indicates that an LSM ≥12.5 kPa was associated with a 56-fold increase in the rates of liver-related events (n = 12) (hazard ratio [HR] 56; 95% CI 7–415; p <0.001).

An LSM ≥24.0 kPa had the greatest predictive power for liver-related events in the community with an HR of 152 (CI 15–1,523; p <0.001 [Table S1]).

Only age remained as an additional independent predictor on multivariate cox-regression (HR 1.11; p = 0.050).

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

Effective elimination of CHC requires the widespread uptake of CHC treatment in a community setting.

The majority of individuals with CHC continue to be solely managed in the primary care setting4 with barriers present to the uptake of treatment in specialist centres.7,35

It has been assumed that those with more advanced liver disease are rapidly identified for ongoing care.

However, prior studies have suggested that the true incidence of cirrhosis in the community is underestimated, partly because of the late clinical presentation of overt cirrhosis.

Autopsy studies suggest markers of cirrhosis are not always present, with up to 23.9% having no features on biochemical or clinical examination.36

This creates a challenge for community-based physicians to identify patients with more advanced liver disease who may benefit from specialist care.

PARAGRAPH

Non-invasive tests for the detection of advanced liver disease have been extensively validated in hospital cohorts; however, their role in community groups is less clear.

Prior attempts at community screening in CHC have largely focused on identification of CHC cases.

Those studies that have looked at the prevalence of cirrhosis in the community have been largely retrospective, and thus potentially affected by selection bias.37

Furthermore, the prevalence of cirrhosis in these studies is likely to be an underestimate given reliance on less accurate clinical diagnosis and/or indirect biomarkers.

Those that have used LSM have either done so as general population screening38 or targeted to people who infect drugs, with or without coinfection with HIV.39,40

PARAGRAPH

Our study was conducted in an urbanised and rural population in Victoria, Australia.

Victoria has an estimated 55,000 patients with CHC and over 7,000 with severe fibrosis and 4,000 with cirrhosis, although fibrosis prevalence is determined by rates of progression derived from cohort studies.8

There is limited real-world data to inform decision making.

This is the first prospective, primary care screening study, using LSM in conjunction with biochemical and clinical assessment.

Our findings highlight the significant prevalence of elevated LSM in community patients with CHC, with similar rates to a parallel hospital control cohort (LSM ≥12.5 kPa, 16.5% and 20.2% respectively, p = 0.169).

These results suggest that the prevalence of advanced liver disease is significantly higher than suggested in previous community-based population studies41 and in contrast to previous studies, equivalent to a tertiary cohort.37

PARAGRAPH

A community-based programme for CHC cirrhosis detection is logistically feasible based on our findings.

The participation rate in our study was approximately 76%, and comparable to other population screening programmes such as breast cancer screening participation (54%),42 and significantly greater than faecal occult blood testing (38.4%).43

The participation rate was particularly high given the prevalence of substance use and mental illness in our cohort; both acknowledged barriers for screening programmes.44,45

The low rates of LSM procedural failure indicates the applicability of such a screening tool in the community.

The majority of procedural failures in prior community interventions were associated with elevated BMI and waist circumference.41

The availability of the XL probe (6.7% of examinations) and optimization of probe positioning with B mode ultrasound may well have contributed to the high procedural success rate in our study.

PARAGRAPH

Optimizing the efficacy of this screening programme requires further targeted intervention(s).

There were four factors that independently predicted LSM ≥12.5 kPa; advanced age, alcohol abuse, elevated BMI and ALT ≥2×ULN.

Age and ALT were the only non-modifiable risk factors that remained predictive of advanced liver disease on multivariate modelling.

Targeting patients older than 40 years of age appears more effective as the prevalence of cirrhosis doubles at this threshold.

Hepatic inflammation, as represented by ALT, is commonly suggested to confound LSM readings.

Nevertheless, 66.2% with elevated LSM and radiologically confirmed cirrhosis had an ALT ≥2×ULN.

Alcohol intake of ≥40 g/day is associated with a twofold increase in the risk of severe fibrosis being present.46

At-risk alcohol use was highly prevalent in our population, consistent with previous epidemiological data indicating higher rates in CHC and people who inject drugs compared to the general population.47,48

Cannabis itself has previously been implicated in fibrosis development.49,50

The protective role observed in our study may reflect a trend towards lower rates of alcohol consumption in those actively using cannabis.

Ultimately, substance dependence and co-factors of the metabolic syndrome could be used in conjunction with age to optimize identification for non-invasive screening prior to DAA therapy.

While the metabolic syndrome and central adiposity work synergistically with viral hepatitis to promote fibrosis,51–55 these factors have been associated with false elevation in LSM, particularly once BMI is greater than 35 kg/m2.56

The negative correlation between SCD and prediction of advanced LSM on multivariant analysis was unexpected and may reflect technological limitations, as identified previously with the XL probe.57,58

Therefore care must be taken in interpreting fibrosis stage in this group.

PARAGRAPH

We used a cut-off of 12.5 kPa LSM as a marker of cirrhosis.

Cut-offs used to interpret LSM should be applied cautiously as the predictive value for advanced fibrosis and cirrhosis will depend upon the pre-test probability (prevalence) within the population studied.

Therefore, the true prevalence of cirrhosis in this cohort remains uncertain, with only 82.7% confirmed by a second modality (biochemically/ultrasound/clinical assessment).

The use of LSM to predict liver-related events may represent the optimal application of this technology in the future and this has been demonstrated in hospital based cohorts.24,59,60

Whilst the longitudinal follow-up of our cohort is relatively short at only 15 months, we identified that LSM may have a role in the community setting for prediction of significant liver-related events.

A baseline LSM ≥24 kPa in our cohort was highly predictive of liver-related events (HR 152; p <0.001) despite many being treated with DAA therapy, with only a short follow-up period.

A similar threshold has been identified for predicting liver-related events in prospective and retrospective tertiary studies.24,61,62

Additionally, our data supports the role of non-invasive assessment to identify a community population at high risk of primary liver cancer.

Using LSM to determine eligibility for abdominal ultrasound we detected seven primary liver cancers.

Most of the HCC identified during this study were early stage (BCLC 0 or A) and thus potentially curable.

However, longitudinal follow-up and cost-effective modelling will be required to determine the ultimate value of this intervention for HCC detection and the prediction of liver-related events in the community.

PARAGRAPH

Despite our prospective study representing the real-world application of a community-based CHC assessment programme, it has several limitations.

Firstly, only a minority of patients had liver biopsies (n = 8) and therefore the true prevalence of advanced fibrosis and cirrhosis is unknown.

However, consistent with real-world settings, liver biopsy is reserved for diagnostic dilemmas given its invasive nature, cost and poor acceptability by the general population.

Non-invasive tools, particularly transient elastography, have been well validated in the CHC population.

While discrete LSM “cut-offs” are used for practical reasons, the use of a cut-off of LSM ≥12.5 kPa as a marker of cirrhosis may falsely elevate the true prevalence of cirrhosis in this group.

An LSM ≥12.5 kPa is primarily used for its negative predictive value to exclude advanced liver disease.

The positive predictive value associated with this cut-off ranges between 58 to 77%.32

However, this threshold has been widely used in phase III DAA registration trials to depict cirrhosis.63

LSM additionally conveys more information than a binary outcome regarding fibrosis stage.

Our study has included an analysis of endpoints that are clinically more relevant than fibrosis stage alone.

PARAGRAPH

Secondly, while these patients represent a large cohort of community managed patients, selection bias is possible because of the use of high caseload recruitment sites and involvement of primary care physicians actively interested in the management of viral hepatitis.

Caution is therefore required in extrapolating these findings across other community populations where disease prevalence may vary due to demographic and epidemiological factors.

However, attempts were made to control for these factors with consecutive recruitment, multiple sites, diverse geographical locations of urbanised and rural primary care practices and a large recruitment cohort representing 4.8% of the estimated CHC population in the catchment area.

We were able to demonstrate consistent distribution of elevated LSM over different practice types (opioid substitution clinics, general medical practice, mixed opioid/general medicine practices and rural locations) representing diverse community backgrounds.

Moreover, to further examine for selection bias, we included a parallel prospectively recruited tertiary hospital cohort.

Our findings would suggest that a percentage of individuals, comparable to a hospital referral cohort, are living with advanced liver disease in the community without specialist support.

Of interest, 30% of the community cohort had a distant history of prior specialist input which serves to highlight the difficulty of patient retention in specialty care.

A finding consistent with literature reporting that 50 to 75% of patients are lost to follow-up after initial consultation.7,64

This underscores the importance of community-based care programmes.

PARAGRAPH

Challenges remain for primary care physicians in the management of viral hepatitis.

In particular, 18.8% and 8.5% of patients with CHC at risk of significant fibrosis and advanced fibrosis/cirrhosis respectively, had no biochemical evidence of active liver disease at the time of screening.

While all those at risk of advanced fibrosis/cirrhosis without biochemical features had radiological evidence of cirrhosis, the difficulty remains in engaging individuals to have additional disease assessment.

Participant utilization of health resources both prior to and following our intervention was poor.

Despite attempts to remove many barriers to treatment and health care assessment, only 55% attended organized specialist follow-up, and only 63% commenced primary care managed DAA therapy at the time of analysis.

PARAGRAPH

As we head towards a CHC elimination strategy with the introduction of highly effective and safe DAA therapy, the identification of a high risk CHC population with advanced liver disease will only become a greater priority.

We have highlighted a gap in primary care management with a significant proportion of those with advanced fibrosis remaining undetected.

Our study suggests a comprehensive community-based CHC screening programme is feasible and may identify those at risk of liver-related events and HCC.

SECTION

Financial support

PARAGRAPH

Project grant provided by Department of Health, Victorian Government Australia.

Project grant providers had no role in study design, implementation or manuscript development.

SECTION

Conflicts of interest

PARAGRAPH

The authors declare no conflicts of interest that pertain to this work.

PARAGRAPH

Please refer to the accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.

SECTION

Authors’ contributions

PARAGRAPH

All authors contributed to the study design and implementation.

All authors contributed drafting and review of the manuscript.