10.1016/j.jhep.2019.05.031

ABSTRACT

TITLE

Toll-like receptor 3 downregulation is an escape mechanism from apoptosis during hepatocarcinogenesis

PARAGRAPH

Low levels of toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) are associated with poor prognosis, primarily owing to the loss of inflammatory signaling and subsequent lack of immune cell recruitment to the liver.

Herein, we explore the role of TLR3-triggered apoptosis in HCC cells.

PARAGRAPH

Quantitative reverse transcription PCR, western blotting, immunohistochemistry and comparative genomic hybridization were used to analyze human and mouse HCC cell lines, as well as surgically resected primary human HCCs, and to study the impact of TLR3 expression on patient outcomes.

Functional analyses were performed in HCC cells, following the restoration of TLR3 by lentiviral transduction.

The role of TLR3-triggered apoptosis in HCC was analyzed in vivo in a transgenic mouse model of HCC.

PARAGRAPH

Lower expression of TLR3 in tumor compared to non-tumor matched tissue was observed at both mRNA and protein levels in primary HCC, and was predictive of shorter recurrence-free survival after surgical resection in both univariate (hazard ratio [HR] 1.79; 95% CI 1.04–3.06; p = 0.03) and multivariate analyses (HR 1.73; CI 1.01–2.97; p = 0.04).

Immunohistochemistry confirmed frequent downregulation of TLR3 in human and mouse primary HCC cells.

None of the 6 human HCC cell lines analyzed expressed TLR3, and ectopic expression of TLR3 following lentiviral transduction not only restored the inflammatory response but also sensitized cells to TLR3-triggered apoptosis.

Lastly, in the transgenic mouse model of HCC, absence of TLR3 expression was accompanied by a lower rate of preneoplastic hepatocyte apoptosis and accelerated hepatocarcinogenesis without altering the tumor immune infiltrate.

PARAGRAPH

Downregulation of TLR3 protects transforming hepatocytes from direct TLR3-triggered apoptosis, thereby contributing to hepatocarcinogenesis and poor patient outcome.

