10.1016/j.jhep.2018.05.007

ABSTRACT

TITLE

Human liver infiltrating γδ T cells are composed of clonally expanded circulating and tissue-resident populations

PARAGRAPH

γδ T cells comprise a substantial proportion of tissue-associated lymphocytes.

However, our current understanding of human γδ T cells is primarily based on peripheral blood subsets, while the immunobiology of tissue-associated subsets remains largely unclear.

Therefore, we aimed to elucidate the T cell receptor (TCR) diversity, immunophenotype and function of γδ T cells in the human liver.

PARAGRAPH

We characterised the TCR repertoire, immunophenotype and function of human liver infiltrating γδ T cells, by TCR sequencing analysis, flow cytometry, in situ hybridisation and immunohistochemistry.

We focussed on the predominant tissue-associated Vδ2− γδ subset, which is implicated in liver immunopathology.

PARAGRAPH

Intrahepatic Vδ2− γδ T cells were highly clonally focussed, with single expanded clonotypes featuring complex, private TCR rearrangements frequently dominating the compartment.

Such T cells were predominantly CD27lo/− effector lymphocytes, whereas naïve CD27hi, TCR-diverse populations present in matched blood were generally absent in the liver.

Furthermore, while a CD45RAhi Vδ2− γδ effector subset present in both liver and peripheral blood contained overlapping TCR clonotypes, the liver Vδ2− γδ T cell pool also included a phenotypically distinct CD45RAlo effector compartment that was enriched for expression of the tissue tropism marker CD69, the hepatic homing chemokine receptors CXCR3 and CXCR6, and liver-restricted TCR clonotypes, suggestive of intrahepatic tissue residency.

Liver infiltrating Vδ2− γδ cells were capable of polyfunctional cytokine secretion, and unlike peripheral blood subsets, were responsive to both TCR and innate stimuli.

PARAGRAPH

These findings suggest that the ability of Vδ2− γδ T cells to undergo clonotypic expansion and differentiation is crucial in permitting access to solid tissues, such as the liver, which results in functionally distinct peripheral and liver-resident memory γδ T cell subsets.

They also highlight the inherent functional plasticity within the Vδ2− γδ T cell compartment and provide information that could be used for the design of cellular therapies that suppress liver inflammation or combat liver cancer.

