10.1016/j.jhep.2019.11.021

ABSTRACT

TITLE

MUC13 promotes intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma progression via EGFR/PI3K/AKT pathways

PARAGRAPH

MUC13 is reportedly overexpressed in human malignancies.

However, the clinicopathological and biological significance of MUC13 in human intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (iCCA) remain unclear.

The aim of this study was to define the role of MUC13 in the progression of iCCA.

PARAGRAPH

Expression levels of MUC13 in human iCCA samples were evaluated by immunohistochemistry, western blot, and real-time PCR.

In vitro and in vivo experiments were used to assess the effect of MUC13 on iCCA cell growth and metastasis.

Crosstalk between MUC13 and EGFR/PI3K/AKT signaling was analyzed by molecular methods.

The upstream regulatory effects of MUC13 were evaluated by Luciferase and DNA methylation assays.

PARAGRAPH

MUC13 was overexpressed in human iCCA specimens and iCCA cells.

MUC13 overexpression positively correlated with clinicopathological characteristics of iCCA, such as vascular invasion and lymph node metastasis, and was independently associated with poor survival.

Results from loss-of-function and gain-of-function experiments suggested that knockdown of MUC13 attenuated, while overexpression of MUC13 enhanced, the proliferation, motility, and invasiveness of iCCA cells in vitro and in vivo.

Mechanistically, we found that the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-AKT signal pathway and its downstream effectors, such as tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases 1 and matrix metallopeptidase 9, were required for MUC13-mediated tumor metastasis of iCCA.

MUC13 interacted with EGFR and subsequently activated the EGFR/PI3K/AKT signal pathway by promoting EGFR dimerization and preventing EGFR internalization.

We also found that MUC13 was directly regulated by miR-212-3p, whose downregulation was related to aberrant CpG hypermethylation in the promoter area.

PARAGRAPH

These findings suggest that aberrant hypermethylation-induced downregulation of miR-212-3p results in overexpression of MUC13 in iCCA, leading to metastasis via activation of the EGFR/PI3K/AKT signaling pathway.

