10.1016/j.jasrep.2018.08.041

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Heating mollusc shells - A radiocarbon and microstructure perspective from archaeological shells recovered from Kalba, Sharjah Emirate, UAE

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Shells provide valuable sources of information within archaeology, whether for establishing chronologies for archaeological sites by means of radiocarbon dating and AAR (Kosnik et al., 2017) or through palaeoclimate and palaeoenvironmental studies (Biagi, 1994; Lindauer et al., 2017; Zazzo et al., 2016).

This is especially so in arid environments where other organic matter such as peat or humic silt and clay are poorly preserved.

Given the abundance of burnt shells in archaeological deposits (Barker et al., 2010; Stringer et al., 2008; Taylor et al., 2011), it is fundamental to understand the effect of heating on the geochemical composition of the shelly material, which in turn, may have consequences for the determination of reservoir effects during radiocarbon dating.

PARAGRAPH

Depending on the species, shells can provide high-resolution information about palaeoenvironments over decades, centuries or millenia (Andrus, 2011; Hallmann et al., 2013; Lindauer et al., 2017; Paul and Mauldin, 2013; Scourse et al., 2012; Wanamaker Jr et al., 2008).

The information stored in the shell material contains evidence about environmental conditions and food resources throughout their complete lifetime (Culleton et al., 2006; Hallmann et al., 2013; Leng and Lewis, 2016; Twaddle et al., 2017).

Furthermore, shells can aid our understanding of strategies of food procurement by hunter-gatherer communities (Burchell et al., 2013).

In archaeological contexts, large quantities of aquatic shells are found along contemporary or past coastlines, either as discrete shell midden deposits, or associated with settlements (Biagi, 1994, 2013; Biagi and Nisbet, 1999; Fernández-López de Pablo, 2016; Parker and Goudie, 2007; Uerpmann, 1990).

Sometimes shells are also found in excavations further inland, e.g. as grave goods (Kutterer, 2013).

In all these contexts, it is critical to know whether or not heated (burnt) shells can still be used to provide chronological control.

Furthermore, sometimes it is not obvious at first sight whether shell remains have been heated or not.

The most obvious way that shells would be heating is during the cooking process.

PARAGRAPH

In an earlier paper, Milano et al. (2016) focused upon species Phorcus turbinatus.

The behaviour of shell microstructures and changes associated with the temperature of heating were explored; it was shown that above a temperature of 500 °C a mineralogical transformation from aragonite into calcite and major structural alterations occurred.

Milano et al. (2016) also found that exposure to high temperatures resulted in a systematic shift in the oxygen stable isotope content (δ18O), which has significant implications for palaeoclimatic interpretations of sea surface temperatures.

The information on altered microstructures is relevant when interpreting the radiocarbon data on heated shells as a change in microstructure might lead to an incorporation of surrounding carbon sources like atmosphere or ash.

PARAGRAPH

When investigating ancient shell midden sites or settlements, shells are often used for radiocarbon dating.

However, shells that show evidence of burning are generally excluded from such studies.

However, it is important to remember that in some cases it may not be possible to detect burning features at first sight.

Thus, cooked shells could unintentionally be selected for dating.

It is therefore important to know how heating affects the dates that may potentially result when using shells for radiocarbon dating.

PARAGRAPH

In this paper, we build upon the studies of Milano et al. (2016) and explore the role that heating of mollusc shells may have on radiocarbon analyses based on (shell) material recovered from an archaeological site, Khor Kalba in the United Arab Emirates (UAE).

SECTION

Shells from archaeological sites in Kalba

PARAGRAPH

Khor Kalba in the Sharjah Emirate, United Arab Emirates, is a city that lies on the Gulf of Oman, between the Hajar Mountains and the present-day coast (Fig. 1).

Since the Neolithic, there has been a lagoon near Kalba where mangroves, mostly Avicenna marina, are abundant, providing the local population with food and wood.

In Kalba, shell middens dating back to the Neolithic are located in the vicinity of the mangroves and the surrounding sabkha (salt flats), thus providing potential information about human dietary strategy (Magee, 2014; Phillips and Mosseri-Marlio, 2002).

However, no Neolithic settlements have been found.

Nonetheless, north of the shell middens and the city of Kalba, ancient settlement structures, including mudbrick walls, houses and a tower dating from the Bronze Age and the Iron Age have been discovered (Fig. 1) and investigated archaeologically (Carter, 1997; Phillips and Mosseri-Marlio, 2002).

PARAGRAPH

In the present study, we focus on two species of marine shell, Anadara uropigimelana (Bory de Saint-Vincent, 1827) and Terebralia palustris (L), that were identified in large quantities from a shell midden and archaeological settlement near the mangrove at Kalba.

These shells show a species-specific radiocarbon reservoir effect, as their lifestyle and diet differ significantly, although both are found in or near mangrove forests (see also Section 1.2.).

Anadara uropigimelana is a filter feeder and lives buried in the sand (Azzoug et al., 2012; Murray-Wallace et al., 2000), whilst in contrast, Terebralia palustris feeds on leaf litter (Fratini et al., 2008; Slim et al., 1997) and can be found on the surface of sediments, or attached to mangrove roots.

Hence, each of them utilizes different carbon sources.

This leads to a different species-specific reservoir effect, as suggested by other studies, for example, in the United States (Culleton et al., 2006).

PARAGRAPH

For this study, we sampled a shell midden of late Neolithic date, but with two distinct phases (site code KK1): once in 2013 and again in 2015 (Fig. 1).

We also collected younger specimens of Bronze Age date from a settlement northwest of the modern city of Kalba (site code K4); near a mudbrick wall, we located two shell layers, one on top of the other, and sampled each of them separately.

The lower layer, referred to as MBZ1 (Middle Bronze Age 1) turns out to be around 100 years older than the overlying layer MBZ2.

The younger layer (MBZ2) consisted mainly of shells, in contrast to the older layer (MBZ1), which comprised a mix of shells, ash and sediment.

The age correlations follow those of Carl Philipps (pers.

Comm., Phillips and Mosseri-Marlio, 2002, Lindauer et al., 2017).

PARAGRAPH

The environmental conditions of shell growth as well as seasonal patterns are usually investigated using sclerochronology and stable isotopes (δ13C and δ18O).

Kalba is a settlement along a lagoon with occasional inputs of freshwater as a result of heavy rainfall events, which makes δ13C signals difficult to interpret due to the several overlapping sources of carbon influencing the signal.

Shell δ13C mirrors processes like ecosystem metabolism as well as estuarine mixing, but for marine shells, it is mainly influenced by dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC) in the water (McConnaughey and Gillikin, 2008).

In contrast, the δ18O signature is easier to interpret, since it mainly reflects sea surface temperature and salinity.

PARAGRAPH

For A. uropigimelana, its shell grows continuously from autumn until spring but its growth ceases in the summer.

The seasonality of shell growth and hence the ability to reflect seasonal environmental changes in A. uropigimelana from Kalba had been investigated using growth lines and stable isotopes, δ13C and δ18O (Lindauer et al., 2016); it also enables the determination of the season of collection/harvesting of the shell.

For Terebralia palustris, these factors have not yet been investigated.

SECTION

Radiocarbon measurement of shells

PARAGRAPH

In coastal archaeological and geochronological studies, shells (marine and terrestrial) are often used for radiocarbon dating, especially in arid areas, where the rate of preservation of organic material is low (Biagi, 1994; Diedrich, 2006).

However, dating marine shells is not straightforward.

Marine shells usually show ages which appear to be older than contemporary terrestrial materials, due to the old carbon content of the reservoir from which they incorporate carbon (Ascough et al., 2005; Dutta, 2008; Petchey et al., 2013; Petchey and Clark, 2011; Southon et al., 2002).

Oceans can store carbon for very long timescales, especially when the carbon is transported to great depths, where it can remain for around 1000 years or more (Ascough et al., 2005; Dutta, 2008).

During this time, 14C, being radioactive (half-life 5730 ± 40 years), decays and is not replaced by new 14C from the atmosphere.

Therefore, deep water becomes depleted in 14C.

Due to ocean circulation patterns, this 14C – depleted (“old”) water can be brought up to shallower water depths or to the surface, where it can be incorporated by organisms, making their apparent radiocarbon age older than their calendar age.

This older age is called reservoir age R (t) (Stuiver and Braziunas, 1993; Stuiver et al., 1986).

Hence, for marine material, a specific radiocarbon calibration curve exists.

The current marine calibration curve is Marine13 (Reimer et al., 2013), but locally, there can be a difference between the marine calibration curve and the determined reservoir age.

This offset is known as local reservoir effect ΔR (Petchey et al., 2008; Stuiver et al., 1986).

For archaeologists working in coastal environments, knowledge of this reservoir effect is fundamental to building chronologies, if shells are to be used to establish chronologies through dating.

For palaeoenvironmental research, changes in reservoir effects become important, since they reflect variations in the environmental conditions, such as fluctuations in sea levels.

PARAGRAPH

A previous study (Lindauer et al., 2017) determined a species-specific reservoir effect and its variation between the Neolithic and Bronze Age on shells of A. uropigimelana and T. palustris from midden KK1 and settlement K4 in Kalba, Sharjah Emirate, UAE (Table 1).

Because T. palustris feeds mainly on leaf litter of mangrove leaves, its radiocarbon signal has a terrestrial component, and therefore results in a lower reservoir effect than for A. uropigimelana, which feeds exclusively on algae and other marine particulates.

Between the Neolithic and Bronze Age, the reservoir effect ΔR decreased significantly, from 576 ± 90 years to 105 ± 50 for A. uropigimelana and 390 ± 66 to −26 ± 46 years for T. palustris.

As can be seen in Table 1, the difference between the species is also reduced through time.

These time-dependent (species-specific) reservoir effects reflect not only changes in the local environmental conditions (such as sea level, food resources and food quality), but also larger-scale changes in climate, as can be seen when comparing climate estimates with proxy records from other locations (Culleton et al., 2006; Lindauer et al., 2017).

The reasons for changes in ΔR over time, and especially the tendency for negative ΔR values for T. palustris, are discussed in detail, and compared with other ΔR studies in nearby areas, in Lindauer et al. (2017).

PARAGRAPH

The use of ash as terrestrial counterpart for determining a reservoir effect is always critical.

The preferred material for this would be charcoal fragments, preferably from short-lived species or branches.

One does not always have the possibility to choose and needs to deal with difficult material.

In this case the ash samples were tested using stable isotopes to derive the origin of their main component.

As in our case the δ13C values had been found to be between −20 to −23‰ these samples can be regarded as being of plant origin.

Mangrove leaves and branches have δ13C values in the range of −20 to −28‰.

Contamination from attached carbonates etc. is removed during sample preparation.

A discussion of this can be found in Lindauer et al. (2017).

PARAGRAPH

As found out by Zazzo et al. (2012), an old wood effect from heating the shells with older parts of a tree (for example) should clearly be evident in older radiocarbon ages of the dated material.

In our case, when using wood for heating, an old wood effect might cause depleted 14C to be stored in the shell.

A similar investigation was conducted on the inclusion of old wood 14C into animal bones when heating them (Snoeck et al., 2016; Zazzo et al., 2012).

Zazzo et al. (2012) suggest using δ13C to determine whether carbon of bone apatite originates from bone or partially from the charcoal used.

In order to decide whether this is also necessary in the case of heated shells, we need to know the temperature of combustion, its duration and the type of fuel (old wood) used for the fire.

Depending on the heating process and the wood used this might provide a possible explanation if we find older radiocarbon ages for heated shells compared to unprocessed shell material of the same archaeological layer.

SECTION

Mineralogy

PARAGRAPH

The two common forms of calcium carbonate occurring in shells are aragonite and calcite.

Molluscs precipitate their shells, adopting one of these two phases, though in some cases, they precipitate both forms.

Shell mineralogical composition can be determined using Confocal Raman Microscopy (CRM) and Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM).

It can also be determined by using Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometry (FTIR), among other methods.

Aragonite is a CaCO3 metastable phase, which tends to convert into the more stable calcite, as a result of diagenetic recrystallization (Loftus et al., 2015).

Naturally, diagenesis occurs over significant geological timespans.

However, exposure to elevated temperatures can accelerate this process, mimicking the effect of diagenesis on shell structure and composition.

During the process of dissolution and recrystallization, all environmental information stored in the carbonate is substantially affected (Loftus et al., 2015).

Because aragonite is prone to diagenetic alteration, changes at the geochemical level become severe when carbon depleted in δ13C and 14C is involved.

Since calcite is more stable, there should be no further exchange with the environment, following complete transition.

In naturally- and slowly-occurring diagenetic processes, a larger data spread can be expected, since old and new information might be mixed.

However, as the heat-induced diagenesis process is significantly faster, a different response can be expected.

Geochemical, structural and mineralogical features serve to better understand the transition process itself, and the possible carbon exchange, which can be responsible for potential dating errors.

SECTION

Methods of heating a shell

PARAGRAPH

Different colour shades on the shell surface, from light grey to dark grey and sometimes white, indicate different heat exposures and potentially, different cooking techniques (Milano et al., 2016).

For instance, darker colourations may be related to direct contact with the heat source (i.e. burning in a fire).

On the other hand, shells with lighter shades might have been heated through a medium (i.e. boiled in pots) or else burnt only for a short time.

Cooking pots have been found in Arabia, dating from the Bronze and Iron Age, but not from Neolithic contexts (Händel, 2014).

In this geographical area, details about how the shells were cooked or heated are not well understood.

However, an ethnological study of traditional methods of shellfish cooking and burning by aboriginal communities in Australia in the 1970s was published by Meehan (1982).

This showed that the shells are placed in a previously cleaned area of sand, hinge side up.

Small wooden sticks and dead grass are placed on top of them and ignited.

The fire starts at one end of the ‘shell phalanx’ and travels along the shells (Fig. 2).

This fire is designed to be hot and fast, burning for a few minutes only, enough to release the mollusc muscle attachment and to allow the opening of the valves.

The mollusc flesh is then extracted and eaten, once the shells have cooled down (Meehan, 1982).

PARAGRAPH

The traditional processing techniques observed within that study seem to fit, on the whole, with our observations of the colouration of the shells presented in this paper.

What makes Meehan's findings even more relevant to our study is that the most common shellfish consumed by these populations were species of Tapes hiantina.

(in the Arabian Sea, this species is comparable to Marcia flammea, Marcia, marmorata., Protapes sinuosa.

and Circenita callipyga.),

and other species which can be found in the Arabian Sea, especially T. palustris and A. uropigimelana.

PARAGRAPH

Meehan (1982), provides observations on foraging seasons and diet composition and describes several occasions on which shellfish were cooked.

These observations indicate that this type of food processing has an important role in the marine resource-based diet of hunter-gatherer communities.

The areas used for shellfish processing and cooking were often associated with the dinnertime camps, home bases or processing sites near the beds where the molluscs were collected.

The latter case might account for shell middens not always being linked to a specific long-term settlement, as in the case of Kalba.

In particular, Meehan (1982) carefully describes a common cooking practice still used by the local populations in the 1970s.

PARAGRAPH

Meehan (1982) also describes the use of steam ovens.

This practice is adopted for large quantities of shellfish (~70 kg) prepared for ceremonial gatherings.

On these occasions, a large pit measuring around 1 m2 is constructed and firewood placed into it.

Numerous empty shells collected from the beach are then placed on top of the charcoal.

The shells with living organisms still inside are tipped onto this surface of old shells and charcoal, and then covered with green branches, which prevent steam from escaping.

As for the cooking time, the use of this technique takes only a few minutes (around two minutes, Meehan, 1982).

The observation that older shells were also used on top of the charcoal to make the fire is important when considering the presence of outliers in radiocarbon data derived from the analysis of shell samples.

If older shells are used as a cooking base, and mixed with fresh shells, older ages might be present in the results.

Potentially, such results can supply additional information regarding cooking processes, thus providing important archaeological evidence.

For this and other reasons (variability between specimens), older dates should not be excluded when reporting datasets and their origins robustly considered.

SECTION

Material and methods

SECTION

Radiocarbon measurements

PARAGRAPH

Here, we present previously published shell data from Kalba, Sharjah Emirate, UAE (Lindauer et al., 2016; Lindauer et al., 2017), but now with respect to the role that heating may have had on the shell material.

We also use new material to allow a distinct comparison of the radiocarbon ages of burnt and unburnt shells of different species.

The shells we had dated previously were analyzed and dated either at: the Curt-Engelhorn-Centre Archaeometry (CEZA) in Mannheim, Germany (Kromer et al., 2013; Lindauer et al., 2016) using a MICADAS system (Synal et al., 2007); the KCCAMS facility of the University of California, Irvine, USA (Santos and Ormsby, 2013; Santos and Xu, 2016); or at the Max-Planck-Institute for Biogeochemistry (MPI-BGC), Jena, Germany (Steinhof et al., 2004).

The new shells measured for comparison were only measured at MPI-BGC.

The pretreatment and measurement procedure of all these facilities are described in detail in Lindauer et al. (2017).

PARAGRAPH

The terrestrial ages of these new shell measurements cover the Neolithic as well as the Middle Bronze Age, and are given in Table 2, accompanied by the radiocarbon ages on contemporaneous ash, charcoal and stone (DS in Table 2).

The ash samples were checked for their wood origin using stable isotope δ13C measurements, which gave results of −20 to −23‰, representing typical wood/plant values of C3 plants.

Being adjacent to a mangrove, the wood used for burning, and the charcoal samples derived from it, could be mangrove trees (here Avicenna marina).

Due to low rainfall in this area, only a few acacia and similar trees are found and these have rather short life-spans.

PARAGRAPH

All calibrations in this publication were carried out using Oxcal 4.2.

(Bronk Ramsey and Lee, 2013; Ramsey, 1995) using the Intcal13 and Marine13 dataset (Reimer et al., 2013).

The isotope values of δ13C measured with the AMS system are not given, because they only correct the measurement, but do not allow an interpretation regarding the source of the material.

For this purpose a measurement of δ13C from an Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer (IRMS) would be needed.

SECTION

Mineralogy and microstructures

PARAGRAPH

The shells of A. uropigimelana were cut along the growth axis into 3 mm thick sections using a low-speed, precision saw (Buehler Isomet 1000).

The sections were then mounted on microscope slides using JB KWIK epoxy resin, and polished using SiC (800 and 1200 grit).

After each polish, the samples were rinsed in an ultrasonic bath for 3–4 min.

Subsequently they were polished with Al2O3 powder (1 μm).

PARAGRAPH

Changes in the mineralogical composition were investigated with Confocal Raman Microscopy (CRM).

Point measurements were taken of each of three shell layers (inner shell layer, middle shell layer, outer shell layer) of both species.

A Horiba Jobin Yvon LabRam 800 spectrometer coupled with an Olympus BX41 optical microscope was used (employing a 532.21 nm laser wavelength, a 400 μm confocal hole, a grating with 1800 grooves/mm, an entrance slit width of 100 μm and 50× magnification, long working distance objective lens).

The time window for acquisition was 5 s.

The mineralogy of sample K4 MBZ1 A1 was analyzed using a WITec alpha 300 R (WITec GmbH, Germany) confocal Raman microscope.

Scans of 5100 × 1000 μm and 100 × 100 μm were performed using a 488 nm diode laser.

A spectrometer (UHTS 300, WITec, Germany) was used with a 600 mm−1 grating, a 500 nm blaze and an integration time of 0.09 s.

PARAGRAPH

Microstructures were analyzed using a LOT Quantum Design Phenom Pro desktop Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM).

To enhance the visibility of the carbonate structures, the sections of shell were first etched in 1 vol% HCl for 5 s and sputter-coated with a 2 nm-thick layer of platinum, using a Leica EM ACE200 Vacuum Coating machine.

SECTION

Results

SECTION

Raman measurements

PARAGRAPH

Raman spectroscopy was performed in order to assess the mineralogical conversion of the shell material (Lindauer et al., 2016; Milano et al., 2018).

Both A. uropigimelana and T. palustris., have aragonitic shells that tend to convert into calcite upon heating.

The shells are formed in three microstructurally different layers (oSL = outer shell layer; mSL = middle shell layer; iSL = inner shell layer).

Fig. 3 shows an A. uropigimelana specimen (K4 MBZ1 A1), appearing unheated on the outside, however when cut, it shows an interesting and unexpected appearance, which is attributable to heating.

For this shell, single data points were measured using CRM, both for the internal part of the shell, as well as for the outer shell layer (Fig. 3).

The results indicate that the outer part is composed completely of calcite, as can be seen from the inorganic calcite spectrum, plotted for comparison.

In this case, the typical calcite peaks are present at 153 cm−1, 281 cm−1, 713 cm−1 and 1086 cm−1.

In contrast, the internal component of the shell shows an extra peak at 206 cm−1, which indicates the presence of aragonite (Fig. 3).

PARAGRAPH

In order to further understand the extent of incomplete mineralogical transition, large scans were performed using CRM in two areas of interest.

One scan was performed near the hinge, an area where the shell had a darker colouration.

The second scan was measured toward the ventral margin, in the lighter portion of the shell (Fig. 4).

The maps show that most of the shell is calcite.

However, there are some areas, which display the spectrum of the aragonite-calcite transition.

These areas are found in the oSL and mSL, whereas no trace of aragonite is found in the iSL.

The transition is more visible in the shell portion near the ventral margin, the lighter part of the shell.

PARAGRAPH

Raman results of some of our T. palustris.

Shells can be found in Milano et al. (2018) and the results indicated in that paper, too, show that heating of the aragonitic shell results in a transformation to calcite.

SECTION

Microstructures

PARAGRAPH

Heating of shells is not only reflected in the transition from aragonite to calcite, but also in a morphometric change of the microstructures, as previously suggested by Milano et al. (2018).

Here, specimen K4 MBZ1 A1 is compared to a completely heated, and also an unheated, shell of the same species, A. uropigimelana (Fig. 5).

SEM images were taken in the darker part, closer to the hinge of the shell, as well as in the lighter part, near the ventral margin.

As the shells consist of three distinct layers, all of them were scanned for comparison.

The microstructures of K4 MBZ1 A1 oSL show some differences between the light and the dark portion of the shell (Fig. 5).

In both portions, the characteristic oSL branching crossed-lamellar structures (shown in the unheated K4 MBZ2 Ana3) are altered, with their 3-rd order lamellae losing geometric definition and starting to fuse together.

However, toward the ventral margin (light portion), the branching of the 1st-order lamellae is still visible, whereas this is not the case for the darker shell portion.

This indicates a less severe structural alteration in the oSL of the light portion compared to the dark one (Fig. 5).

As for the mSL and iSL, the differences between the two shell portions are less evident.

In both cases, the microstructures are significantly altered in comparison to unheated shells.

Generally, all three layers of K4 MBZ1 A1 present microstructure morphometric changes at an intermediate level between the unheated and heated shells (Fig. 5).

PARAGRAPH

The microstructures of unheated T. palustris showed the typical simple and linear-crossed lamellar microstructures.

Heated specimens, on the other hand, showed a transformation of lamellar biomineral units into large irregular-shaped assemblages, both in the oSL and the iSL.

Examples of microstructures investigated in our heated as well as unheated Terebralia palustris shells can be found in Milano et al. (2018).

SECTION

Radiocarbon

PARAGRAPH

Radiocarbon results are presented in Table 3 as uncalibrated data in 14C yrs.

BP, as well as calibrated with Oxcal 4.2.

(Bronk Ramsey and Lee, 2013; Ramsey, 1995) with the Intcal13 and Marine13 dataset (Reimer et al., 2013).

Prior to analysis, we noted the status of heating of individual shell specimens.

Most of the shells from Kalba were presented in Lindauer et al. (2017).

The data shows a larger age range, since the results are now all calibrated with the reservoir effects and presented as unmodelled ages.

In Lindauer et al. (2017), the results were presented as modelled ages, because they were used to determine a reservoir effect.

To adjust the data to the new measurements, we decided to calibrate them all in the same way.

In addition, the terrestrial periods are shown in Table 1.

The late Neolithic layers of the shell midden KK1 (Kalba) comprised of two layers, dating to 5038 ± 38 cal BC (7013 ± 69 cal BP) for the lower layer, and 4598 ± 34 cal BC (6557 ± 41 cal BP), immediately on top of the first layer.

The Middle Bronze Age in the settlement K4 at Kalba was found in two phase, which were dated to 1878 ± 32 cal BC (3775 ± 48 cal BP) for the lower layer MBZ1 and to 1718 ± 18 cal BC (3671 ± 28 cal BP) for the layer MBZ2 immediately above it.

PARAGRAPH

Even if the uncalibrated results of heated versus unheated shells differ, there is still the possibility of overlapping results after the calibration process.

This overlapping of results would prevent the establishment of a high-resolution chronology for these archaeological sites.

PARAGRAPH

A certain radiocarbon offset between specimens is natural and depending on exact location of habitat, food availability as well as food preference (Claassen, 2009; Culleton et al., 2006).

Stress and illness can also lead to changes in carbon uptake and incorporation into the shell material.

PARAGRAPH

The radiocarbon data is consistent for both heated and unheated material.

PARAGRAPH

In addition to the radiocarbon data, we investigated potential differences between heated and unheated shells, focusing on the mean values and their standard deviations (Table 4).

We also looked at the differences in standard deviations of heated and unheated shells and is discussed in more detail in the following section.

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

Our additional analyses have confirmed previous results relating to the thermal effect on shell microstructures and mineralogy.

Generally, heating induces the fusion of the basic structural units into much larger, joint aggregates, with a very heterogeneous and disordered spatial arrangement, as previously observed by Milano et al. (2016) and Milano et al. (2018).

CRM maps and SEM imaging are helpful tools to identify burnt shells, especially those appearing initially unheated on visual inspection.

PARAGRAPH

In the present study, detailed mineralogical maps allowed the identification of an aragonite - calcite intermediate phase in a heated shell.

The persistence of this calcium carbonate phase can be used to infer important information about the heating process.

One shell in this study (K4 MBZ1 A1) presented a patchy colouration (dark/light grey) and variable mineralogical composition.

The aragonite - calcite transition phase, although limited to some areas of the oSL and mSL, survived in the archaeological record.

This indicates its stability through time and allows more precise estimates of heating temperatures than previously thought.

According to our previous results (Milano et al., 2018; Milano et al., 2016), mineralogical transitions occur between 300 °C and 400 °C, suggesting that K4 MBZ1 A1 was heated to this range of temperatures.

On the other hand, other specimens (i.e., K4MBZ2 GA1) were exposed to higher temperatures that drove the entire shell to transform into calcite.

PARAGRAPH

The overall colour variability of specimen K4 MBZ1 A1 conforms well to the cooking practice described in Section 1.4 and illustrated in Fig. 2.

The dark grey colour near the hinge, shading into a creamy colour toward the ventral margin, is most likely associated with a heating process in which the shells are placed, hinge up, into the sand and a fire is then ignited overtop of them.

PARAGRAPH

Our results, together with the ethnographic observations of Meehan (1982), suggest that a similar heating technique was known in Arabia during the Middle Bronze Age.

Of course the modern study of Meehan was an observation from Australian aboriginal groups and is not from Arabia and so cannot be compared directly to Neolithic and Bronze Age.

However, the shells being T. palustris.

and Andara spp., too, and the microstructure pattern together with the lack of charcoal fragments throughout the late Neolithic shell midden are supporting evidence for a similar method of shell processing.

The hinge was found to be totally calcitic because it had experienced the highest temperature, whereas the ventral margin was subjected to lower temperatures, and therefore it still contained traces of the mineralogical interface.

It is proposed that the duration of heating was rather short, thus preventing the whole shell from transforming completely mineralogically.

However, the mineralogical variability of the shell might well assist in understanding the mechanism of heat transfer.

It is rather unexpected that the outer shell layer (oSL) shows signs of being exposed to lower temperatures than the inner shell layer (iSL).

This would seem to imply a stronger heat transfer through the hinge than along the outer part.

Possibly, the air between the shells may function as a cooling mechanism, whereas the closed inner part with the animal inside may transfer the heat more readily.

In general, it can be said that the different types of microstructure may respond differently to the thermal exposure.

The oSL might be more resistant to mineralogical transformation than the other layers, as previously suggested by Milano et al. (2016).

PARAGRAPH

From a methodological perspective CRM maps are more efficient than point measurements because they take into account the complexity of biogenic carbonates and their potential variable thermal responses.

PARAGRAPH

The results of the radiocarbon measurements do not indicate a significant difference in age between heated and unheated shells.

This becomes obvious when we consider data mean values and their standard deviations, as presented in Table 3.

The difference of the mean values for heated and unheated shells is less than their individual standard deviations, and are thus not statistically significant.

Furthermore, the heated material is sometimes older and sometimes younger than the unheated material, which indicates that there is no systematic difference.

The data, nevertheless, present a larger scatter in the unheated shells, compared to the heated ones.

Furthermore, the average data of the unheated material has a narrower standard deviation than the heated one.

Therefore, we examined the difference of the standard deviations of the mean values.

Although still rather small, here we can see a trend that this difference is negative in all cases, thus pointing to a systematically smaller standard deviation in the heated material.

Further studies with more specimens will be needed to build more robust statistical evidence base to allow further discussion.

Therefore, Table 4 is to be regarded as a first approximation, until a statistically relevant population has been investigated for each layer.

The aim of the present work is to provide the basic knowledge on which future research can be built.

Our results indicate that the narrower variability of the radiocarbon data from heated shells reflects the general assumption that calcite is more stable than aragonite, and that therefore it does not exchange carbon with the environment to the same extent.

The system seems to be isolated against influences from the surroundings, which therefore prevents exchanges with surrounding radiocarbon sources, such as, for instance, limestone detritus in the sediment matrix.

This would explain the obviously reduced data scatter.

PARAGRAPH

Our results suggest that the heating processes do not alter radiocarbon ages of A. uropigimelana and T. palustris.

Therefore, heated shells continue to be useful material which can be used with confidence for dating archaeological contexts and sites, and in palaeoclimate studies.

SECTION

Conclusions

PARAGRAPH

An important result of our study has been to explore the link between modern ethnological studies of shell foraging and processing (heating) in Australia (Meehan, 1982) and ancient food processing methods in Arabia.

Previously, the details of shellfish consumption in this latter region in later prehistory were largely unknown.

Our data suggest that the shells were mainly used as food and they were likely being processed below short-lived, but hot fires.

This conclusion sheds light on the dietary and cooking habits of the local populations, thus contributing to a better understanding of their lifestyle during the late Neolithic.

PARAGRAPH

Shell structure and mineralogical composition are shown to be strongly influenced by heating.

One of our shells clearly showed transitional phases from aragonite to calcite, which allowed us to come to a conclusion about the heating procedure.

PARAGRAPH

From the microstructural perspective, high temperatures lead to a loss in microstructure, with a typical design resulting in a decrease in material resistance to mechanical stress, and thus resulting in more frequent breakage.

In addition, temperatures above 300–400 °C cause a mineralogical change from aragonite to calcite.

Given the intermediate microstructural and mineralogical properties of one of our shells, our results suggest an interpretation of the heating processes used during the Middle Bronze Age.

As described by Meehan (1982), shells would likely be prepared using a fire on top of the shells, which are first aligned on a sandy substrate, with their hinges pointing down.

PARAGRAPH

For the radiocarbon ages, heating has no influence on the measured age itself.

Moreover, the rapid exposure to elevated temperatures appears to induce closure of the shell structures, thus preventing external carbon sources from entering the shell structure itself.

This is reflected in the larger spread in ages of unheated shells versus the narrower age range of heated shells from the same stratigraphic layers of the shell midden and settlement site.

PARAGRAPH

Being aware that there is no significant influence of the heating treatment on the shell radiocarbon geochemistry, heated shells are assessed as providing valuable material for radiocarbon dating, without applying any further corrections.