10.1016/j.jasrep.2018.11.033

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Finding eulachon: The use and cultural importance of Thaleichthys pacificus on the northern Northwest Coast of North America

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Archaeologists have long understood the critical role of coastal and anadromous resources in Northwest Coast (NWC) subsistence practices, but recent research is illustrating the historical depth, variability, and complexity of Indigenous fisheries in the region (Brewster and Martindale, 2011; Cannon et al., 2011; McKechnie and Moss, 2016; Moss, 2012, 2016; Moss and Cannon, 2011; Orchard and Szpak, 2015).

Evidence for salmon and herring fishing, for example, exceeds 10,000 years at some sites (McKechnie et al., 2014), while coast-wide studies document the enormous diversity that existed in pre-contact-period fisheries (McKechnie and Moss, 2016; Moss and Cannon, 2011).

An important contribution of these works is that they challenge conventional progressive-evolutionary models regarding NWC fishing, which have tended to emphasize salmon at the expense of other fish and to couch explanations for broader societal change in terms of intensification (e.g. Ames and Maschner, 1999; Matson and Coupland, 1994).

These researchers have shown, for example, that salmon were not necessarily the “prime mover” in the development of social complexity in California, the Coast Salish area, or in Haida Gwaii (Bilton, 2014; Orchard and Clark, 2014; Orchard and Szpak, 2015; Tushingham and Christiansen, 2015); that typical indicators of intensification such as fish weirs, domestic dwellings, and other examples of the built environment have deep historical roots (Grier, 2014; Martindale et al., 2017a; Smethhurst, 2014); and that activities surrounding the capture, processing, storage, and consumption of resources other than salmon also influenced settlement practices, were central to systems of ownership, and structured socio-political relations (Cannon et al., 2011; McKechnie and Moss, 2016; Tushingham and Christiansen, 2015).

PARAGRAPH

On the northern NWC and specifically within the Northern Tsimshian homeland, archaeological research has focussed on village sites in the inner harbour around the city of Prince Rupert (Letham et al., 2015) and the lower Skeena River (Fig. 1).

These sites have produced large assemblages of vertebrate faunal remains that show a notable emphasis on salmon (Oncorhynchus spp.) (Coupland et al., 2010), and as such, these fish have been at the core of discussions of pre-contact settlement patterns, subsistence practices, and social relations in Northern Tsimshian territory.

More work is needed, however, in order to assess the place of other marine resources in structuring these same processes.

PARAGRAPH

In this paper we examine the evidence for pre-contact eulachon (Thaleichthys pacificus) fisheries in Northern Tsimshian territory through an examination of faunal remains.

We look specifically at fish bone recovered in fine mesh screens during bulk sampling.

First, we explore what biases might affect the recovery and interpretation of eulachon and other smelt remains in archaeological contexts in comparison to expectations drawn from written and oral historical sources; second, we consider a separate, and potentially confounding sampling issue resulting from the historical practice of storage, which separates some fish bones from flesh and oil, creating dual trajectories of use and deposition; third, we examine the relative abundance of smelts, including eulachon, in Prince Rupert Harbour (PRH) archaeological sites and present new data from fifteen village sites in this region; fourth, we compare these results with zooarchaeological assemblages from other sites in PRH and the neighbouring Dundas Islands; and fifth, we look at multiple lines of data to consider how the Northern Tsimshian might have harvested, processed, and consumed smelts in the distant past and how activities pertaining to acquiring eulachon might have influenced broader aspects of ancient Northern Tsimshian lifeways, including settlement, property rights, and trade.

PARAGRAPH

We situate our research within a body of work (e.g. McMillan and McKechnie, 2015) that examines how local resources shaped long-term practices of hunting, fishing, and plant gathering on the NWC.

While certainly adaptive, these practices also shape, and are shaped by, social and political interactions between peoples and as such, are integrated within networks of ownership and property (Grier, 2014; McMillan and McKechnie, 2015; Mitchell and Donald, 2001; Oliver, 2007).

As people live in a particular location and use its resources, they make intentional and unintentional changes to the landscape (Zedeño, 2008).

On the NWC, these kinds of changes include the accumulation of shell and other refuse into middens or spit features, and fish weir and dwelling construction, maintenance, and reconstruction (Grier, 2014; Letham et al., 2015; Martindale et al., 2009; Patton, 2017).

People also build various other forms of infrastructure associated with mariculture (Lepofsky et al., 2015) and wetland plant farming (Hoffman et al., 2016).

Fig. 2 (RBCM PN 4279) is a photograph of Lax-Daoots'ip, the Northern Tsimshian eulachon fishing settlement at the Nass River mouth in 1903; it shows houses, oil rendering-boxes, smoke houses, and eulachon-drying racks, among other infrastructure that require investment to build and maintain from year-to-year at what were owned locations for fishing and processing eulachon (see also Port Simpson Curriculum Committee, n.d.:52).

Archaeological research in Northern Tsimshian territory to date has been largely silent on the role of eulachon fishing in pre-contact lifeways because excavation has focussed on the places where eulachon would have been stored and consumed and not where these fish would have been harvested and processed.

In fact, this is precisely the kind of data that we draw on here: fish remains from archaeological sites some distance from where eulachon were likely harvested.

Researchers can use zooarchaeological data to present partial views of the past, which can reveal core patterns in history, such as regional ecological change or shifts in resource exploitation.

Alone, however, these analyses can be vulnerable to oversimplified interpretations of history.

In this paper, we explore faunal data as one of several lines of evidence, including ethnographic and oral historical evidence for eulachon fishing to consider how these sources intersect and diverge.

SECTION

The life history and habitat of eulachon

PARAGRAPH

Eulachon are one of 7 smelt species of the family Osmeridae that can be found in coastal waters and river systems along the Pacific Coast (Hart, 1988:148–150; Hoos, 1976; Moody and Pitcher, 2010).

Only four species, however, inhabit waters from Bristol Bay on the Bering Sea to Northern California (Hoos, 1976; Moody and Pitcher, 2010).

These osmerids, including surf smelts (Hypomesus pretiosus pretiosus), longfin smelts (Spirinchus thaleichthys), capelin (Mallotus villosus), and eulachon can be caught in estuarine, marine, or fresh water habitats within the Northern Tsimshian homeland.

Eulachon spawn at 3–4 years of age typically in their birth river (Hart, 1988:146–150; Hoos, 1976:149), but spend their adult life in saltwater, often at depths of 20 to 150 m.

In the weeks prior to spawning, they congregate in estuaries before swimming upstream and into fresh water (Hay and McCarter, 2000:13, 23).

PARAGRAPH

There are at least 95 rivers in the Pacific Northwest with eulachon runs (Willson et al., 2006:11), though fewer than half of those have annual runs.

This contrasts dramatically with salmon, with regular runs in at least 10,000 rivers in the same area (Hay and McCarter, 2000:11).

Eulachon natal streams vary in terms of velocity, turbidity, sediment load, and size, but all are fed by melting snow packs or glaciers (Willson et al., 2006:3,17), which could explain the lack of eulachon rivers on Haida Gwaii and the west coast of Vancouver Island (COSEWIC, 2011:7–12; Hay and McCarter, 2000:12).

Thus, while Mitchell and Donald's (2001:20) definition of vast regions of the NWC as “eulachon deserts” might be overstated, eulachon were still much more circumscribed in space and time than other anadromous fish in the region.

Moreover, the concentration of eulachon rivers on the mainland means that eulachon is decidedly “inner coast”, with people living on the NWC's outer shores lacking direct access to this important resource.

Schalk (1977; see also Suttles, 1968:56–68) argues that when staple food species are constrained in time and space, logistical requirements are more complex, leading to increased social differentiation, a point echoed by Binford (1980).

However, the role of eulachon in Tsimshian history is more complex than this simple causality.

PARAGRAPH

As with other smelt species, eulachon are very small fish, usually <25 cm long at spawning (Hay and McCarter, 2000:9–10; Willson et al., 2006:13).

Eulachon eat plankton while in deep water and appear to stop feeding as they head to estuarine environments prior to spawning (Hay and McCarter, 2000:25).

Marine fish, sea birds, and sea mammals prey on eulachon in deep, coastal waters (Hay and McCarter, 2000:24) and follow them into shallow waters (Moody, 2008:4).

Eulachon are notable for their high concentrations of fatty acids.

The proportion of oil varies across eulachon populations, but ranges between 15 and 25% fat content (Iverson et al., 2002).

A recent court decision (R. v. Lax Kw'alaams, 2008 BCSC 447 at para.495), upheld at the Supreme Court of Canada, ruled that Tsimshian people traded commercially in eulachon prior to contact, enshrining it as an Aboriginal right.

While there has been little interest in eulachon as a modern commercial resource, they were central to Indigenous subsistence practices, as well as social and political relations (Miller, 1997:21; Moody, 2008:25–28).

SECTION

Ethnographic and oral historical accounts of the eulachon fishery

PARAGRAPH

Although archaeologists working on the NWC often draw on ethnographic accounts to generate models or aid in the interpretation of archaeological data, researchers are increasingly noting the disparity between these lines of evidence.

Moss (1993) noted 25 years ago that shellfish use was poorly documented by Tlingit ethnographers during the 19th and early 20th centuries, but, as apparent to all archaeologists in the area, would have been critical to pre-contact subsistence practices.

Recently Grier (2007), Martindale (2009), Orchard and Wigen (2016), and McKechnie and Moss (2016) noted other examples of discrepancies between ethnographic accounts of resource use and the archaeological record.

This speaks to the importance of reflecting on the substantial changes in settlement and subsistence practices that may have taken place over the course of millennia due to changes in environment or political or social relations including population decline following European colonization (Letham et al., 2015; Martindale et al., 2017b; McMillan and McKechnie, 2015).

PARAGRAPH

How then, can we assess the relative importance of particular subsistence resources after colonial contact and in the distant past through the archaeological record?

There are a variety of cultural practices and post-depositional processes indicating commonalities with ethnographic depictions of particular NWC groups, but these are neither unambiguously nor representatively reflected in the archaeological record.

In other words, what occurred in the past likely lies somewhere in the muddy middle ground between the extremes represented by ethnography on the one hand and the archaeological record on the other.

Eulachon use among the Tsimshian is an example of this complexity.

PARAGRAPH

Ethnographic and historic sources affirm that eulachon were central to Tsimshian settlement and subsistence practices, as well as social and political interactions.

These fish were caught in large numbers during the spawning season and rendered into oil, which was then stored and traded widely (Boas, 1916:44; Garfield, 1951).

The movement of eulachon oil or grease was such a staple of the regional economy that overland trade routes from the coast to interior were known as grease trails (Port Simpson Curriculum Committee, n.d.:56).

This pattern, as we discuss in detail below, exemplifies the challenges of reconstructing subsistence from durable osteological remains: the use and influence of eulachon in Indigenous culture was far greater than the patterns of fish bones can reveal.

Even a well-sampled material record in this context is not an unambiguous reflection of history, but one of several lines of enquiry providing partial views into the past.

In this view, archaeology provides pieces of the historical puzzle, asking us to collect data broadly and compare the results from different lines of enquiry (Ames and Martindale, 2014).

SECTION

The Northern Tsimshian and eulachon fishing

PARAGRAPH

The Nine Tribes of the Northern Tsimshian were a historical alliance with an ancient history that consolidated around PRH about 1300 years ago (Martindale et al., 2017a) and are today represented by the Lax Kw'alaams and Metlakatla First Nations near the city of Prince Rupert, British Columbia (see Fig. 1).

At the time of European contact in the late 18th century, Northern Tsimshians were semi-sedentary, socially stratified hunter-gatherer-fishers with permanent winter towns in the PRH area, especially along Metlakatla Pass (Martindale et al., 2017b).

Changes resulting from contact with Europeans and other settlers, traders, explorers and colonists, shifted settlement to Lax Kw'alaams around the Hudson's Bay Company fort, which was established in 1834 (Marsden and Galois, 1995; Martindale et al., in press).

This transition correlated somewhat with the rise in economic importance of trade with the newcomers, especially the Tsimshian role in supplying furs to global markets (Dean, 1997).

There is a tendency to see the transition as a clear break from a pre-contact subsistence-based economy to a post-contact market economy, an oversimplification that has been embraced in some legal rulings on Tsimshian Aboriginal rights (Martindale, 2014).

However, trade and market principles existed long into Tsimshian history (Martindale et al., 2017b) and subsistence production and exchange networks persisted long after the arrival of global market economics (Martindale et al., in press).

PARAGRAPH

Despite this complexity, key elements of the role of eulachon in traditional economics are notable from ethnographic and historic sources.

Mitchell and Donald (2001) contend that there were five principal eulachon fisheries on the NWC: the lower Nass, the Kingcome, the Klinaklini, the Squamish, and the lower Fraser (from north to south), but the largest was at the mouth, or estuary, of the lower Nass River, located within the Tsimshian homeland.

These fishing grounds were extremely important for all northern peoples; according to Collison (1915:65; see also Cybulski, 1992:107), the word “Nass” comes from a Tlingit word meaning “food depot”, because of the incredibly rich eulachon runs in the area.

There are also smaller, regular runs on the Skeena, Khyex and Ecstall rivers (see Fig. 1) and the Tsimshian seemingly made use of all four seasonal runs (Hoos, 1976:86–87; Moody and Pitcher, 2010:20).

Collison (1915: 71) notes the Skeena, Khyex, and Ecstall runs are “inferior in quantity and quality to those of the Nass”, though Moody and Pitcher (2010:20) note that Ecstall eulachon were sometimes used in grease production, while the other Skeena eulachon were considered too dry and bitter.

Both marine and land-based resource territories were owned across the Tsimshian region, and the rights and title-owning entity in Tsimshian society is the house group, an extended family lineage.

Each lineage was a distinct social and legal entity, though house groups were integrated into local or village groups also known as tribes (Martindale et al., in press).

Each house group recorded its history via adawx, oral history accounts or memorized, legal records owned by individual house groups that pass from one generation to the next at ceremonial feasts (Marsden, 2002; Martindale, 2006; Martindale et al., 2017a).

As such, much of the territorial system that was in place prior to contact is constructible.

PARAGRAPH

Many Tsimshian people left their winter villages in February and traveled to the Nass estuary en masse for one of the most important fisheries in the region (Boas, 1916:44; Garfield, 1951; Martindale and Marsden, 2011).

This seasonal migration is documented in the adawx, suggesting that Northern Tsimshian use of this location has a deeper history (Marsden, 2002; Martindale and Marsden, 2011:86–88).

The adawx record the first Tsimshian house groups to use the lower Nass in a story centred on Ts'ooda, a spirit, or naxnox-like figure.

In this account, people living at village sites along Metlakatla Pass in PRH, were stopped at Lax Kw'alaams en route to the lower Nass due to strong northerly winds.

Ts'ooda opened a passage for Tsimshians through a hole in a large rock, which allowed people to canoe safely toward the eulachon fishing grounds (Recorded by Henry Tate in Boas, 1916:300; Dean, 1993; Martindale and Marsden, 2011:86).

Regional trade in eulachon grease continued into the colonial era (Fiske, 1991:518; Galois, 1997:128).

Eulachon are still harvested by some households (Port Simpson Curriculum Committee, n.d.:52).

According to Barbara Petzelt, Treaty Coordinator at the Metlakatla Treaty Office (personal communication July 17, 2018), Northern Tsimshian and Nisga'a continue to trade eulachon to Gitksan communities, such as Gitwangak.

This trade generally takes place in May at large sporting or cultural events.

PARAGRAPH

Within the system of territorial rights that conferred resource rights, the eulachon fishery along the Nass River estuary was an outlier.

When the intense but short duration eulachon spawning run began in early spring representatives from communities around the region would gather to trade for rendered eulachon oil (Dean, 1993:39).

Grease was used as a condiment and eaten with most foods, but particularly with seaweed, dried fish, fish eggs, shellfish, stews, and berries (Collison, 1915:67; Port Simpson Curriculum Committee, n.d.:55).

It was also a source of dietary iodine and acted as a preservative for perishable foods, permitting a comprehensive storage and trading economy of subsistence goods.

Although it was a staple of the lower Nass River trade, it was only one of many exchange products, and the lower Nass River eulachon fishery has been interpreted as a regional trade entrepot that reached along the coast, into the interior valleys, and westward to Haida Gwaii across a complex network of overland, riverine, and marine routes (MacDonald and Cove, 1987:x–xi).

The logs of the American trading ship Hamilton of Boston note that in May 1811 at the end of the eulachon fishery, thousands of Indigenous people had gathered at Fishery Bay on the Nass River estuary to trade for grease and other goods (Dean, 1993:140).

Mitchell and Donald (2001) estimate that between 7000 and 10,000 people participated in the lower Nass eulachon fishery.

The resulting settlement was not so much a series of fishing camps then, but a major densely populated community often inhabited for up to three months at a time (Martindale and Marsden, 2011:86–88).

Here, Northern Tsimshian house groups harvested eulachon by the ton, using traps, nets, or rakes.

Boas (1916:400) states that a canoe could be filled with these fish in half a day.

William Collison's (1915); Cybulski, 1992:107) account of the Nisga'a suggested that each household could fish between 5 and 10 tons of eulachon during the spawn.

These fish were roasted, boiled, eaten fresh, smoked and dried (Collison, 1915:69).

According to Boas (1916:44–45) women and children strung eulachon for drying, smoking, and storing (see also Port Simpson Curriculum Committee, n.d.:52).

Two eulachon were hooked together through the mouth and gills and put on a cedar stick; these were either put on drying racks or hung within smoke houses.

Once cured or dried, the fish were packed in bentwood boxes for storage (Boas, 1916: 546; Port Simpson Curriculum Committee, n.d.:53–54).

PARAGRAPH

Most efforts, however, were focussed on the rendering of eulachon oil that took place at the lower Nass settlements.

Preparing the grease was a 2–3 week long labour-intensive process.

Pits as much as 6 ft deep were dug outside houses and were filled with eulachon.

Boas (1916) provides two descriptions of the eulachon oil-rendering process, one an excerpt from a letter by William Duncan and the other a mythical account of oil woman's teaching of a giant.

These mirror Webster's (2001) childhood account of Kwakwaka'wakw eulachon oil processing.

All of these sources recount that most eulachon were collected in baskets, and later poured into a pit or tub of continually-heated water.

After 8–10 days the fish and water were allowed to cool, at which point the grease was skimmed off the top.

Once exhausted of surface oil, the remaining fish matter was squeezed through willow baskets to recover the remaining grease (see also Moody, 2008:76–79).

PARAGRAPH

Ethnographic accounts often emphasize the importance of salmon in structuring Tsimshian settlement practices and socio-political relations.

Each household, or group of households, fished for salmon mostly on a seasonal basis from owned locations in the Skeena.

But the eulachon fishery at the lower Nass River was an important location in the Tsimshian seasonal round and structured social and political relationships among house groups, tribes, and northern Nations (Boas, 1916; Garfield, 1951).

The concept of commonly held property rights beyond the house group did not exist in Tsimshian law, thus the eulachon fishing grounds likely represent a complex network of house group land and marine territories.

Marsden and Galois (1995:171) argue that access to the lower Nass fishery was controlled by one house group, that of Ligeex of the Gispaklo'ots, but this may have been a reflection of Ligeex's ascendency as paramount chief in the post-contact era (Martindale, 2003).

Beynon's (1939:120) notes include a map of the Tsimshian reserve at Fishery Bay subdivided into tribal districts (see also Fig. 2) implying that village groups and their constituent houses owned land on the shore of the fishery, and thus likely marine territorial and resource rights as well.

Eulachon have been a significant resource as a food, a dietary supplement, and a preservative, for considerable time in Tsimshian history.

Given that much of its value was in a form that rendered its bones and tissues into grease, tracing this history through zooarchaeological analyses is challenging.

SECTION

Potential implications of processing, storage and consumption on archaeologically recovered eulachon remains

PARAGRAPH

The rendering process itself has implications for the recovery of eulachon bones and observing and documenting eulachon oil in archaeological contexts both at the location of the lower Nass settlements and the village sites in PRH and elsewhere in the Northern Tsimshian homeland.

Importantly, McNeary (1976:90) states that baskets and any residual material within them were deposited at the lower Nass fishing settlements and the process usually rendered bones soft and unlikely to preserve.

In fact, Nicholson (1992, 1996) has experimentally demonstrated the negative effects of cooking and boiling on fish bone survivability.

The on-site cooking and processing of oil means that any eulachon bones surviving this process as well as hundreds, if not thousands of years of post-depositional processes, would be found at the lower Nass and other eulachon rivers, not at the PRH village sites where most archaeological research has focussed (Ames, 2005; Coupland et al., 2010; MacDonald and Inglis, 1981).

Consumption of smoked and dried eulachon could also influence the distribution of eulachon bones at these settlements, and hence recoverability.

According to William Nelson, Charlene Nelson, Robert Nelson, and Myra Robinson of Metlakatla First Nation (personal communication, April 5, 2017), the “old way” of eating eulachon was to consume dried and smoked fish whole, without removing bones.

Today, most eulachon are half smoked and then frozen and many of the younger generation prefer to remove the backbones and heads prior to eating.

If eulachon were eaten whole, their remains would be distributed differently if present at all in village sites than if heads and backbones were removed just before eating.

SECTION

Methods

PARAGRAPH

We compiled published and unpublished bulk sample data collected from 15 village sites in PRH (Adams, 2016; Coupland et al., 2002, 2006, 2010; Patton, 2011:chapter 8) (Fig. 3).

Sampling and screening protocols differed somewhat among these sites and these are summarized in Table 1.

Column samples were collected in two different ways: Patton and Coupland collected 1000 ml samples from each stratigraphic deposit.

Martindale collected samples at 5–10 cm intervals and as such, volumes range from 250 ml to 1250 ml.

Auger samples also represent 5–10 cm intervals of site matrix and also vary considerably in terms of volume.

We are working with samples, therefore, that vary in terms of mass and volume.

This is not an uncommon situation on the Northwest Coast, where both auger and column sampling are not standardized.

Column samples range in volume from less than one litre to several litres (McKechnie, 2005:207; Moss 1989:130, 2007; Moss et al., 2017; Patton, 2011:chapter 8).

Similarly, auger sampling typically results in individual samples of varying volumes.

Cannon (2000), for example, examined variability in salmon and herring fishing across time and space in the Namu area using auger samples that ranged in volume from approximately 270 to 770 ml.

Caldwell's (2008, 2011) studies of Comox fisheries was also drawn from auger samples that varied in volume, while Brewster and Martindale (2011) used samples that were each approximately 770 ml.

Larger fish bones, such as salmon, might be influenced by variable bulk sample sizes in a variety of ways.

Moss (2007) suggested that salmon vertebral fragments are easily identified and thus could be overrepresented in column sampling compared with other taxa.

Yet very small auger samples, such as 250 ml, might underrepresent salmon and other larger fish.

In our sample, all sites produced numerous bulk samples that exceeded 500 ml in volume.

Six of these sites included a single sample smaller than 500 ml, while a single site included two samples smaller than 500 ml.

As a whole, we feel that the fish bone assemblages from all of the sites in this study are sufficient to represent general patterns in the presence and relative abundance of the fish taxa under consideration.

PARAGRAPH

Samples from individual sites were either wet or dry screened and in some cases both wet and dry screening was employed.

Samples were sorted through nested screens, using either 6.3 mm, 2.8 mm and 1.4 mm mesh or 6.3 mm and 2 mm mesh.

6.3 mm, 2.8 mm and 2 mm screens were sorted entirely, but at three sites (GbTo-31, GbTo-46, and GbTo-28) only 1/4 of material in the smallest screen (in this case 1.4 mm) was sorted and identified.

As such, NISP of fish caught in this screen were multiplied by four in order to make them broadly comparable to the other sites in our study (Table 2).

We recognize that this method of deriving values for 1.4 mm screens provides only a coarse estimate for small screen NISP at these three sites.

The contents of the 1.4 mm mesh screens were well mixed and relatively homogenous because they were divided after screening, although we acknowledge that use of a splitter would have improved sample homogeneity (Limp, 1974; Schaaf, 1981; Van der Veen and Fieller, 1982).

PARAGRAPH

Fish remains were identified by a number of faunal analysts using a number of different collections.

Aubrey Cannon identified fish remains from samples taken from eight sites and Mariko Adams, Iain McKechnie, and Raini Bevilacqua identified fish remains from one site each.

Patton identified most fish remains from four sites with the assistance of Kathlyn Stewart (Canadian Museum of Nature).

Small screen fish specimens from GbTo-77 that Patton was unable to identify to species were analyzed by Susan Crockford (Pacific Identification, Inc.); this included all smelt remains, which consisted entirely of vertebrae.

Crockford also confirmed Cannon's eulachon identifications.

Recently, researchers have commented on the difficulty of distinguishing smelt species from each other (Moss et al., 2017; Palmer et al., 2018), but note that there are morphological traits specific to eulachon that facilitate its identification (Moss et al., 2017).

Crockford reported the following about distinguishing eulachon from other smelt species:

PARAGRAPH

Eulachon have distinctively thin, fragile bones, and simple tubular vertebrae that are not anything like herring (Clupea pallasi) or surf smelt (Hypomesus pretiosus).

Capelin (Mallotus villosus) is the species most likely to be confused for eulachon but enough diagnostic characteristics exist for non-vertebral elements and whole vertebrae that most elements of either species can be identified with confidence.

The comparative collection used to identify these fish remains (University of Victoria, Anthropology) contains multiple specimens of all of the above species (Crockford, personal communication, Oct 29th, 2018).

PARAGRAPH

The village sites presented here date from the Middle to Late Holocene (Table 3).

Some of the sites were continuously inhabited over the course of the last 5000 years, while others were founded during the Late Holocene and were inhabited for shorter duration.

All of these villages are shell midden sites, in that the primary component of the site matrix is shell.

They are defined as villages because the midden surface contains house depressions.

We recognize, however, that the earliest deposits at some of the long-inhabited, deep middens might not represent village occupations, but perhaps another aspects of regional settlement such as camps (Martindale et al., 2017a).

SECTION

Results

PARAGRAPH

According to McKechnie and Moss (2016) smelt remains are relatively ubiquitous in coastal northern NWC zooarchaeological assemblages, occurring in 55% of the 18 sites they examined.

Our data show even greater ubiquity of smelts in PRH as they occur in 13 of the 15 sites presented here (87%).

When smelts are present, they range in terms of relative abundance from 0.25% to 37% based on NISP.

The relative proportion of salmon and herring also vary considerably across sites, though salmon proportions do not fall below 16% and herring range from 1% to 79%.

Smelts were identified to species at nine of the 15 sites in this study.

At all but one of the nine sites, the only smelts identified to species were eulachon.

At GbTo-77 (Table 4), however, 106 smelt bones were identified to species; 79 were identified as eulachon, 25 as surf smelts, and two as capelin.

In this example, eulachon comprised 17% of the identified fish NISP from the bulk samples, but it is likely that many of the smelts that could not be identified beyond family are in fact eulachon.

In sum, the bulk samples show that eulachon/smelts are not just present at village sites in PRH, they are sometimes abundant, comprising, for example, over 1/3 of the bulk sample fish assemblage at GbTo-77.

PARAGRAPH

Our results build on Brewster and Martindale's (2011) research into fisheries on the Dundas Islands.

Brewster collected auger samples from 18 shell midden sites across the archipelago (Fig. 4), including villages and camps (Martindale et al., 2017a).

Eulachon were present at all seven village sites and at eight of the 12 camps investigated (Table 5).

The relative proportion of eulachon remains at village sites in terms of NISP ranged from approximately 8% to 33%; eulachon abundance was more variable at camps, ranging from none to as much as 66%.

These results show that eulachon have a high ubiquity in the Dundas Islands, particularly at village sites, that these fish are often well represented in bulk sample assemblages, and that their abundance is highly variable.

Moreover, while the highest proportion of eulachon was found at camps, there appears to be no strong correlation between site type and eulachon/smelt abundance both within the PRH and Dundas Islands samples.

That is to say eulachon appear to be no more abundant at any particular site type than any other.

PARAGRAPH

There is evidence for some degree of intra-site variability in terms of where eulachon and other small fish remains are found at village sites.

Patton (2011:279) noted elsewhere that most smelt specimens at GbTo-77, GbTo-31, GbTo-28, and GbTo-46 were found in and around surface house depressions or in association with house floors, and rarely if at all, from back midden contexts.

In a similar vein, our GcTo-6 auger sample data was collected from the midden area between surface house depressions and smelts made up approximately 6% of the total fish NISP, while auger samples analyzed more than a decade ago from the back midden (Stewart et al., 2003) produced no smelts.

Although back midden samples are small, which could account for this patterning in some way, this pattern may also reflect the storage and consumption of smoked or dried eulachon and other smelts within domestic dwellings.

These remains then become a part of middens between house depressions as houses are repaired, maintained, cleaned out, and rebuilt.

This might also reflect refuse disposal patterns, wherein larger elements, such as the bones of larger fish, which are more likely to cause a hindrance to daily life, are swept up and removed from living areas (e.g. Hayden and Cannon, 1983:154).

In sum, however, the variability of eulachon remains and other smelts within sites is a reminder of shell midden heterogeneity, whether or not this patterning pertains to cultural patterns of deposition or sampling.

SECTION

Discussion

SECTION

Screening protocols

PARAGRAPH

An important insight of the work we present here is the necessity of using small screen sizes in sampling archaeological sites for faunal remains, an observation that has been made by many scholars (Caldwell et al., 2012; McKechnie and Moss, 2016; Moss, 1989, 2007; Moss et al., 2017; Orchard and Szpak, 2015; Stewart et al., 2003; Tushingham et al., 2013).

Eulachon are very small fish with very small bones often <4 mm in diameter meaning that eulachon vertebrae are usually lost in larger screen sizes (McKechnie, 2005).

May (1979) commented on the effects of screen size in eulachon recovery almost 40 years ago at the Ridley Island site, GbTn-19, where just two specimens were documented in field-collected assemblages and 13 specimens in the bulk samples.

Sampling and screening protocols were considerably different at Ridley Island than at the sites that we present here, which complicates any direct quantitative comparison among them.

Eulachon remains at GbTn-19, however, were sufficiently abundant in bulk samples that May estimated these small fish could have been as abundant as salmon in terms of NISP.

Similarly, our results show that smelts, including eulachon, appear to be far more abundant when small screens are used in the recovery of faunal remains than when they are not.

For example, Coupland et al. (2010) showed that salmon comprised >85% of identified fish remains in >3 mm screens at GbTo-28, GbTo-46, GbTo-77, GbTo-31 and GcTo-6.

Yet including remains caught in <2.8 mm screens as we do here suggests that small fish, including smelts are more abundant than indicated by the larger screens.

This is supported by Susan Crockford's zooarchaeological analysis of faunal assemblages from GbTo-54 and GbTo-13 (Eldridge et al., 2015), which showed that eulachon are much better represented in small screens than in the field-collected assemblages screened through larger mesh sizes.

Even with the inclusion of small screen fish bone assemblages, comparisons of large-versus-small fish remains are complex and potentially problematic.

As this article and others have demonstrated, small mesh sizes can increase NISPs for small forage fish, such as smelts and herring.

Using relative proportions, as we do here, will mean that as one taxon increases, others decrease.

In the examples presented, the presence of eulachon and other smelt bones in the bulk faunal assemblages invariably decreases the relative proportion of salmon remains.

While relative proportion is not a perfect means of comparing abundance in zooarchaeological assemblages, it is a widely used method (McKechnie, 2005).

PARAGRAPH

There are also cultural practices associated with fish processing and consumption, in conjunction with where and how food waste is deposited, that can contribute to lower forage fish NISPs (Palmer et al., 2018; Tushingham et al., 2013).

We have outlined many of these processes above and elaborate on particularly important ones, oil processing and trade, below.

SECTION

Antiquity of the eulachon fishery in northern Tsimshian territory

PARAGRAPH

Our research also shows that while smelts are nearly ubiquitous in PRH village sites, their abundance is highly variable from site to site in the harbour, and in the broader Northern Tsimshian territory.

This is not only demonstrated at the sites for which we provide new data, but also in comparison with other recently excavated PRH village sites, as well as camp and village sites in the Dundas Islands.

Eulachon remains were enormously abundant even in field-collected assemblages at GbTo-54 (only 4% in field screened assemblages, but 30% of bulk sample screening) and GbTo-13 (32% of field screened sediments and 54% of the bulk sample screening), which no doubt attests to the sheer volume of eulachon that must have been brought to these villages, likely from the Nass estuary (Eldridge et al., 2015).

As noted, smaller eulachon runs exist on two of the lower Skeena River tributaries as well as the Skeena itself.

The lower Nass fishery, however, features prominently in ethnographic (Collison, 1915; Garfield, 1951) and oral records (Martindale and Marsden, 2011), as well as Tsimshian mythology (e.g. Boas, 1916), while the other eulachon rivers do not.

The Skeena runs are also historically small and short-lived (Moody and Pitcher, 2010:20).

We cannot confirm that the eulachon in our study sites came exclusively from the Nass estuary, but it seems likely.

Moreover, the Dundas Islands are much closer to the mouth of the Nass than the lower Skeena suggesting that eulachon remains found in Dundas Islands sites likely came from the lower Nass.

PARAGRAPH

Because of the enormous variability in terms of smelt and eulachon abundance at the sites that we present here and at Dundas Islands sites, it is difficult to determine eulachon's precise role in pre-contact settlement, subsistence, and ownership in this region.

Perhaps the largest obstacle, however, to understanding the history of pre-contact period eulachon fishing in Northern Tsimshian territory is the lack of intensive survey and excavation at the lower Nass River, where only one site has been intensively studied with results published.

The Greenville Burial Ground is located just upstream from 19th century Northern Tsimshian eulachon fishing locations documented by Beynon and recorded in the adawx.

Over 6000 smelt bones, composing approximately 38% of the faunal assemblage, were identified at Greenville, mostly within a single component that dated between 1000 and 1500 years old (Cybulski, 1992:107–108).

The specimens appeared clustered, and in one instance, smelt vertebrae were articulated, indicating that people deposited whole fish in these contexts, perhaps as food offerings for the dead.

These smelts were not identified to species but Cybulski argues that they are likely eulachon given the site's location at the lower Nass.

PARAGRAPH

These results, both from the PRH sites presented here, and the data drawn from other published sources, shed some light on the antiquity of eulachon fishing in Northern Tsimshian territory.

Looking at the distribution of radiocarbon dates from all sites, it appears that Northern Tsimshian had access to eulachon either directly fishing them, probably from the lower Nass, or through trade, as early as 2500 years ago and perhaps as early as 5000 years ago (see also Brewster and Martindale, 2011).

Admittedly, the chronology of eulachon use at these sites is complex; many sites represent long periods of time, whether continuously or intermittently inhabited over the mid-to-late Holocene.

When we plotted smelt and eulachon abundance at the PRH sites through time, no strong patterning emerged (Fig. 5).

Eulachon specimens in PRH village sites could reflect trading relationships.

The relative abundance of eulachon, however, at GbTo-77 and GbTo-24, as well as at GbTo-54 and GbTo-13 reported by Eldridge et al. (2015), and the abundance of eulachon and/or smelts at sites in the Dundas Islands, support the idea that the Tsimshian seasonal round, documented by 19th century ethnographers and in the Tsimshian adawx, has a deep history in the region.

In fact, there are some indications from the southern coast that NWC peoples fished eulachon well into the early Middle Holocene.

Eulachon were identified at the Glenrose Cannery Site (Matson, 1976, 1980), for example, comprising 12 to 13% of the bulk sample faunal assemblage, and concentrated in the Old Cordilleran and St. Mungo deposits.

This indicates not only the deep history of eulachon fishing on the coast, but perhaps changes in fishing emphasis at this location through time.

SECTION

The antiquity of eulachon oil and the grease trade

PARAGRAPH

The evidence that we present here likely reflects eulachon being brought into PRH and the Dundas Islands as smoked or dried fish and not as oil, supporting Eldridge and co-authors’ (2015) interpretation of abundant eulachon remains at GbTo-13 and GbTo-54.

Theoretically, other eulachon, for which we have no archaeological evidence, could have been rendered into oil at the lower Nass River fishing settlements.

Once again, sampling and recovery could partly explain the paucity of eulachon at many of these sites and its absence at GbTo-27 and GbTo-23, as could a lack of resident household rights to eulachon fishing.

It is possible, however, that house groups at these PRH villages rendered eulachon into oil at their fishing camps, thus leaving no archaeological signature at eulachon harvesting locations or at villages (sensu Cannon et al., 2011; Cybulski, 1992:108; May, 1979).

PARAGRAPH

We grapple here with limited archaeological evidence for eulachon oil by drawing on other lines of enquiry partly because of the important place of eulachon oil in structuring socio-political interactions during the contact-and-post-contact period.

Just as Moss (2016) has recently shown with herring, eulachon and eulachon oil seem to have served different purposes in different social and economic contexts.

Eulachon oil was a staple for many Tsimshian (Mitchell and Donald, 2001).

As noted, it could be used to preserve foods, for medicinal purposes, and to provide much needed sustenance for people consuming large amounts of dried fish (Mitchell and Donald, 2001; Port Simpson Curriculum Committee, n.d.:55).

Collison (1941:26) and many other ethnographers (e.g. Curtis, 1915) considered eulachon oil a necessity for NWC peoples.

Tsimshian mythology consists of many descriptions of the lower Nass fishery that often highlight the abundance of food available here and that all Tsimshians traveled to this location at the end of the winter (Boas, 1916:373–374, 399).

In one description, Tate (in Boas, 1916:380) records that “…people from all the places…all come up to Nass River, because plenty of food is there in the springtime…and they all enjoy taking the olachen [sic] which arrives, and all are satisfied”.

Most house groups, then, seem to have access to eulachon and seemingly the oil itself.

Yet eulachon oil also made some house groups rich and these families could leverage the grease to articulate their wealth to others through trade and consumption.

Some wealthy house groups used the grease as cooking oil (Port Simpson Curriculum Committee, n.d.:55) and MacDonald and Cove (1987:182–183) write hosts sometimes burned eulachon oil at feasts in order to display their wealth to guests (see also Boas, 1916:506).

In other words, eulachon oil might have been fairly ubiquitous among Northern Tsimshian house groups in the post-contact period, but importantly, abundance of oil and the way it could be used, demonstrated household wealth.

PARAGRAPH

As noted, control of the eulachon fishery and oil trade made many Tsimshian families wealthy.

Trade extended into the interior, but also to regions of the north coast that lacked direct access to eulachon runs, such as Haida Gwaii (Boas, 1916:44; Garfield, 1951; Port Simpson Curriculum Committee, n.d.: 56).

Ethnographic and historical sources show that the Tsimshian traded eulachon oil, dried eulachon, and other goods with the Haida for canoes, seaweed, dried halibut, and other items (Curtis, 1916:134; c.f. Blackman, 1990:246; Dawson, 1880:112B; MacDonald and Cove, 1987).

In the final decades of the maritime fur trade, some traders acted as middlemen transporting eulachon oil from the Nass to Haida Gwaii (Howay, 1938:xiv–xv; see also Orchard, 2009:33).

For the Haida, eulachon oil was less a staple than a great luxury (Howay, 1938:xiv–xv), which they used as a preservative for a variety of plants (Blackman, 1990; Curtis, 1916; Dawson, 1880).

PARAGRAPH

The history of this exchange of inner-coast/outer-coast goods, however, is not clear.

James Swan (1884) noted that Haidas had fished black cod in the past and rendered them into oil when they were “at variance” with mainland groups, suggesting that there was some antiquity to the trade, but that a local alternative was available during disruptions of trade between mainland and island peoples.

MacDonald and Cove (1987:x–xi) suggest that the technology of fishing eulachon and rendering oil is likely only 2000 to 3000 years old, although it is not clear what evidence they are using to reach this conclusion.

As MacDonald (2002):14; see also Moss, 2008) notes, however, the eulachon fishery put Northern Tsimshian in a dominant economic position on this part of the coast, particularly those house groups with rights to the Nass River fishery.

Trade in eulachon oil also fostered social interactions such as feasting and gift giving, finding marriage partners, and inter-personal observation.

In other words, the eulachon trade was not just a trade in oil and fish, but also an opportunity for cultural exchange and diffusion of ideas among northern peoples.

PARAGRAPH

While McKechnie and Moss (2016) showed that smelts were present in 44% of the 18 Haida Gwaii sites in their sample, Orchard (2009) found few smelts in his study of later pre-contact and early contact period fish assemblages (and these are not necessarily eulachon).

In the large sample of sites excavated by Acheson (1998), Wigen (1990) identified just a single eulachon bone at FaTt-9, a large village site dating to the past 1000 years.

This single eulachon specimen alone might not be a strong indication of inner coast/outer coast trade, but it is just one of a number of mainland items found in Haida Gwaii archaeological contexts.

Together, these attest to a degree of pre-contact trade between Haida Gwaii and the mainland that may date as early as 5000 BP (Fladmark, 1975; Fladmark et al., 1990; Moss, 2008; Orchard, 2009; Sutherland, 2001).

If Tsimshian were rendering eulachon oil during the pre-contact period, and this is the central question, then the oil might also have been traded along with other items to adjacent groups such as the Haida.

SECTION

Conclusions and future research

PARAGRAPH

Our analysis is hampered by the lack of data from eulachon fishing locations, which has been shown in other regions to provide important information about harvesting and processing (e.g. Butler and Chatters, 1994; Tushingham and Christiansen, 2015; Tushingham et al., 2013).

Thus far, our research shows that eulachon is present in village sites in PRH and that its presence likely demonstrates that these fish were smoked and dried, likely at the Nass estuary, brought to the harbour whole, and stored in houses (sensu Eldridge et al., 2015; Tushingham and Christiansen, 2015).

While some of this could have been traded into PRH, people living at sites with a relatively high proportion of eulachon likely had access to eulachon fishing spots on the lower Nass, suggesting that this component of the 19th century Tsimshian seasonal round is thousands of years old.

In this way, our results expand on our understanding of the complexity of pre-contact fisheries in the region to consider the role of fish other than salmon in settlement and subsistence practices over the millennia (Moss and Cannon, 2011; Moss et al., 2017; Tushingham and Christiansen, 2015).

PARAGRAPH

There is, however, considerable variability in terms of the abundance of eulachon and other smelts in Northern Tsimshian village sites, suggesting perhaps, that not all house groups had access to the lower Nass River.

In other words, regional patterns of eulachon use during much of the mid-to-late Holocene might have differed somewhat from the early contact period.

We suggest, however, that village sites with little to no eulachon remains might also have had access to eulachon fishing grounds, but rendered these fish into oil.

In fact, oral and historical records indicate that all house groups held rights to fish eulachon at Fishery Bay prior to the 19th century (Port Simpson Curriculum Committee, n.d.:51).

Finding direct evidence for eulachon oil rendering would likely be a difficult task, but would help to fill out the picture of pre-contact eulachon fishing that is slowly coming into focus.

Survey and testing of the lower Nass might locate the archaeological remnants of eulachon fishing settlements, yet the process of cooking and rendering oil results in fragile bones that are unlikely to survive taphonomic processes.

Such a survey, however, might be able to locate some of the infrastructure associated with eulachon oil processing and would not only allow us to think about the role of eulachon within pre-contact Northern Tsimshian territory, but also the history of the Nass estuary as a regional trading hub.

As in many zooarchaeological contexts better faunal data are essential in reconstructing resource management, harvesting, exchange and consumption patterns – but they are not the only data worth considering.