10.1016/j.jhep.2018.11.030

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Serum hepatitis B core-related antigen (HBcrAg) correlates with covalently closed circular DNA transcriptional activity in chronic hepatitis B patients

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

The development of novel antiviral agents and immunomodulatory approaches to cure hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection requires new biomarkers capable of reflecting the intrahepatic activity of the virus and chronic HBV (CHB) stages and defining new meaningful treatment endpoints.

Indeed, there is an unmet need for standardized assays able to provide mechanistic insights into the effects of the novel antiviral and immunomodulatory agents and to assess treatment efficacy.1

PARAGRAPH

HBV covalently closed circular (ccc)DNA constitutes the unique template for pregenomic (pg)RNA transcription and viral genome replication.

Its persistence in the nucleus of infected cells is responsible for the chronicity of HBV infection.2

So far, antiviral therapies have demonstrated a modest effect on the established cccDNA pool.3–6

Measurement of intrahepatic cccDNA levels and transcriptional activity is therefore crucial for the management of patients with CHB and for treatment individualization.

The need for liver biopsy strongly limits the evaluation of cccDNA in routine clinical practice.

Currently, serum HBV-DNA, hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) and the quantification of HBsAg (qHBsAg) are the most widely used viral markers to diagnose HBV infection and to monitor antiviral therapy.7

Nucleos(t)ides analogues (NAs) block viral polymerase and are highly efficient in achieving viral suppression, despite the continuous presence of cccDNA in infected hepatocytes.

Thus, the correlation between intrahepatic cccDNA and serum HBV-DNA is lost and serum HBV-DNA quantification cannot be considered a surrogate marker for cccDNA in NA-treated patients.4

HBsAg is the hallmark of infection and its clearance is considered to be the most important clinical endpoint7 because both spontaneous and therapy-induced HBsAg loss are associated with histological improvement, a reduced risk of hepatocellular carcinoma and prolonged survival.8–11

The degree of correlation between qHBsAg and intrahepatic viral markers, in particular cccDNA levels, varies greatly between studies and is still debated,12–18 particularly in HBeAg− carriers, where expression from HBV integrants may significantly contribute to HBsAg production, in addition to its expression from the cccDNA template,19 as has been shown in HBV infected chimpanzees.20

PARAGRAPH

Indeed, during NA therapy, the kinetics of qHBsAg decline are much slower in HBeAg− patients than in HBeAg+ patients and slower than those of serum HBV-DNA, reflecting the pool of infected hepatocytes harboring either cccDNA or integrated viral sequences.21–23

Quantification of serum HBV RNAs may represent a novel option to predict virological response to both NAs and interferon,24,25 but their correlation with intrahepatic viral parameters needs further investigation with well-defined assays.

As yet, no surrogate serum marker satisfactorily reflects the pool of transcriptionally active cccDNA in the liver.

The so-called hepatitis B core-related antigen (HBcrAg) assay utilizes a mixture of monoclonal antibodies isolated from HBV core antigen-immunized mice26 to detect and quantify HBV core antigen (HBcAg), free HBeAg, HBeAg−antibody complex, and the 22 kDa precore protein (p22cr).26,27

Several reports suggest that HBcrAg levels correlate with serum HBV-DNA in untreated patients with CHB and might be useful to differentiate HBeAg− patients with active and inactive disease.28–32

A correlation between HBcrAg levels and the size of the intrahepatic cccDNA pool has been suggested in cohorts of Asian patients with genotype B/C CHB, either untreated33–35 or undergoing NA therapy.35–37

HBcrAg has been also shown to correlate with intrahepatic viral RNA levels in Asian patients treated with NAs.37

No studies are available on HBcrAg and intrahepatic viral parameters in HBV genotypes other than B/C and it remains to be defined whether, and to what extent, HBcrAg serum levels reflect the transcriptional activity of cccDNA.

PARAGRAPH

To better characterize the clinical value of HBcrAg detection, we have investigated the relationship between circulating HBcrAg, HBV-DNA, qHBsAg and intrahepatic cccDNA transcriptional activity, in a cohort of untreated patients with CHB infected with several HBV genotypes.

SECTION

Materials and methods

SECTION

Patients

PARAGRAPH

Serum samples concomitant to liver biopsy were available for the study in 130 untreated patients with CHB (4 HBeAg+ chronic infection (CI), 32 HBeAg+ chronic hepatitis (CH), 33 HBeAg− CI and 61 HBeAg− CH) (Table S1),7 who underwent needle liver biopsy for routine histology assessment, enrolled at the Hepatology Unit of the “Hospices Civils de Lyon” and at the Gastroenterology and Hepatology Unit of the “Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico” in Milan.

Part of the liver tissue was snap frozen and stored at −80 °C.

All patients showed no concomitant serological markers of hepatitis C virus, human immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis D virus infections.

The overall cohort was composed of 37 women and 93 men, aged from 16 to 66 years (median of 39 years) (Table 1).

All patients were treatment naïve except for 5 patients out of 130: 4 received a course of interferon therapy and 1 was treated with lamivudine for a few months more than 10  years before liver biopsy.

All patients provided written informed consent and the protocol was approved by the Lyon and Milan institutional Ethic Committees.

SECTION

Quantification of serum HBV virological and serological parameters

PARAGRAPH

HBeAg status was determined using Abbott Architect® HBeAg assay (Abbott Diagnostic, Chicago, IL, United States).

Serum HBV-DNA quantification was performed by quantitative PCR using Cobas® Ampliprep/Cobas® Taqman® HBV test (Roche Diagnostics, Manheim, Germany).

The detection range was between 20  IU/ml and 1.7 × 108  IU/ml.

Serum qHBsAg was quantified with Elecsys® HBsAg II kit/Cobas e411® (Roche Diagnostics, Manheim, Germany) according to manufacturer’s instructions.

SECTION

Measurement of serum HBcrAg levels

PARAGRAPH

Quantitative levels of HBcrAg were determined using the Lumipulse G HBcrAg assay using the LUMIPULSE G1200 Analyzer (Fujirebio Europe, Gent, Belgium) according to the manufacturer's instructions.

HBcrAg levels are quantified in U/ml and the assay measures simultaneously denatured HBeAg, HBcAg and the precore protein p22cr (aa −28 to aa 150).

The assay's measurement linear range spans from 3 to 7 logU/ml.

Despite the machine’s lowest sensitivity limit being 2 logU/ml, 100% specificity is reached if values are above 3 logU/ml, thus HBcrAg levels between 2 and 3 LogU/ml are considered negative.

Samples with HBcrAg above 7 logU/ml were diluted with specific dilution reagent and retested in order to quantify HBcrAg values.

SECTION

Histologic analysis

PARAGRAPH

Fibrosis and necroinflammatory activity were quantified using METAVIR classification38 by the pathology services of Hospices Civils de Lyon and “Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico” in Milan.

Patients were divided into 2 groups for both necroinflammatory activity and fibrosis scores: none or mild (below or equal to 1) vs. moderate to severe (above 2), according to the European Association for the Study of the Liver (EASL) Clinical Practice Guidelines for HBV treatment.39

SECTION

DNA and RNA extraction from liver biopsies

PARAGRAPH

DNA and RNA were extracted from snap frozen human liver needle biopsies as described in Ref. 12.

Briefly, liver samples were first homogenized on ice using a TissueRuptor (Qiagen®, Hilden, Germany) in homogenization buffer (Tris HCl pH 8 50 mM, EDTA 1 mM, NaCl 150 mM), then divided in 2 pieces for purification of DNA (MasterPure DNA Purification Kit (Epicentre®, by Illumina, Madison, United States) and RNA (Nucleospin® Total RNA and Protein Isolation Kit, Macherey-Nagel, Düren, Germany), respectively.

SuperScript™ III first-Strand Synthesis SuperMix was used for complementary DNA synthesis by qRT-PCR (Invitrogen by Life Technologies©, Carlsbad, United States).

Quantity and integrity of the extracted DNA and RNA and synthetized cDNA were assessed by NanoDrop Spectrophotometer (NanoDrop Technologies, Wilmington, DE, USA).

SECTION

Quantification of total HBV-DNA, cccDNA and pregenomic (pg)RNA in liver samples

PARAGRAPH

Quantification was performed using the Light Cycler® 480 Real Time PCR System (Roche diagnostics, Manheim, Germany) with primers and fluorescence dual hybridization probes specific for total HBV-DNA or cccDNA as described in.12

Before cccDNA amplification, DNA was treated with 10U of Plasmid-safe DNase (Epicentre® by Illumina) for 45 minutes at 37 °C following the latest update of the international working group on cccDNA standardization (Allweiss et al., 2017 International HBV Meeting, O-45).

Serial dilutions of a plasmid containing an HBV monomer (pHBV-EcoR1) served as quantification standard.

To normalize the number of viral copies per cell content, the number of cellular genomes was determined using the β-globin gene kit (Roche Diagnostics, Manheim, Germany).

Patient samples were independently analyzed in duplicate.

The range of quantification was comprised between 101 and 107 copies of HBV genome/well for both cccDNA and total HBV-DNA assays.

cccDNA quantification fell under the limit of detection for 7 out of 130 patients tested.

For pgRNA detection, specific primers and Taqman® hybridization probe were used, as described in.12

Patient samples were independently analyzed in duplicate and pgRNA relative amount was normalized over the expression of housekeeping gene GUSB (Hs99999908_m1, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).

SECTION

Determination of HBV genotype

PARAGRAPH

Intrahepatic DNA extracted from liver biopsies was used as a template for the PCR amplification of the RT domain of the HBV polymerase using the primer pair L4 5′-TCACAATACCGCAGAGTCTAGACT-3′ (nucleotide position 231-254) and RV5 5′- GGTTGCGTCAGCAAACACTTG-3′ (1177-1197) and the PrimeSTAR® Max DNA Polymerase according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Takara).

The PCR products were sequenced by GATC.

Sequence analysis was performed using the HBVdb tools to determine HBV genotype (https://hbvdb.ibcp.fr/HBVdb/).40

SECTION

Statistical analysis

PARAGRAPH

Comparison between groups of patients was performed using XLStat and the non-parametric Mann-Whitney U Test or Kruskal-Wallis test when necessary.

Multiple correlations were calculated with the Spearman’s statistic followed by Holm’s method for correction.

Principal component analysis (PCA) was performed on the first 5 dimensions using Qlucore® Omics Explorer software (Qlucore, Sweden).

k-means clustering, and heat map generation followed by hierarchical clustering were conducted using Qlucore® Omics Explorer software (Qlucore, Sweden).

PARAGRAPH

For further details regarding the materials used, please refer to the CTAT table.

SECTION

Results

SECTION

Patients’ characteristics and results of serum and intrahepatic viral marker analysis

PARAGRAPH

Table 1 summarizes patients' demographics and virological parameters in serum and in the liver.

Most of the patients were of Caucasian (55/130) and African (41/130) origin with a predominance of HBV genotype D (51/105 tested) (Table 1).

HBeAg+ patients (HBeAg+ CI and HBeAg+ CH) had the highest HBcrAg levels, with 78% showing HBcrAg levels >7 LogU/ml, while a wider and heterogeneous distribution was found in HBeAg− patients (HBeAg− CI and HBeAg− CH), with HBcrAg levels <3 LogU/ml in 35% of cases (Fig. S1).

HBeAg+ patients showed higher values of all viral replication markers (serum viral load, intrahepatic total HBV-DNA [tHBV-DNA], cccDNA, pgRNA and cccDNA transcriptional activity [pgRNA/cccDNA ratio]) compared to HBeAg− patients (Table 1 and Table S1).

Mild levels of fibrosis and necroinflammatory activity were found in the majority of patients, with no significant differences between HBeAg+ and HBeAg− groups.

HBcrAg values were higher in patients showing fibrosis and necroinflammatory activity values >2xULN and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels >2xULN (Fig. S2).

No significant differences were observed in HBcrAg distribution according to viral genotypes by Kruskal-Wallis analysis (Fig. S2).

SECTION

Correlation of HBcrAg with serum and intrahepatic viral markers

PARAGRAPH

HBcrAg levels showed a good correlation with serum HBV-DNA levels in HBeAg+ patients and in HBeAg− CH but not in HBeAg− CI (all patients: R = 0.82, p <0.0001; HBeAg+ CH: R = 0.46, p = 0.005; HBeAg− CH: R = 0.57, p <0.001; HBeAg− CI: R = −0.08, p = n.s.) (Fig. 1, upper panels).

Among the HBeAg+ patients, HBeAg+ CI (red dots) could not be distinguished from HBeAg+ CH (black dots) (Fig. 1).

Similar results were obtained when viral genotypes A, C and D were analyzed separately (Fig. S3) or when patients were divided according to their ethnicity (Fig. S4).

HBcrAg levels also correlated with qHBsAg in HBeAg+ patients but not in HBeAg− patients (all patients: R = 0.44, p <0.0001; HBeAg+ CH: R = 0.48, p = 0.003; HBeAg− CH: R = −0.24, p = n.s.; HBeAg− CI: R = −0.25, p = n.s.) (Fig. 1, lower panels).

Similar correlations were observed across genotype A or D and patients of Caucasian origin, whereas the correlation between HBcrAg and qHBs was lost in genotype C HBeAg+ Asian patients (Figs. S5 and S6).

Serum HBV-DNA and HBcrAg were positively correlated with all intrahepatic viral replication markers (Table 2), albeit correlation coefficients for HBcrAg were much stronger.

On the contrary, qHBsAg showed only a weak correlation with tHBV-DNA, pgRNA and cccDNA transcriptional activity and no significant correlation with cccDNA levels (Table 2).

Notably, in HBeAg− CH patients HBcrAg correlated with pgRNA levels and transcriptional activity whereas there was no correlation with qHBsAg (Table 2).

SECTION

HBcrAg positivity is associated with higher intrahepatic viral markers and cccDNA transcriptional activity in HBeAg− patients

PARAGRAPH

While HBeAg+ patients were all positive for HBcrAg quantification, HBcrAg was considered negative (<3 LogU/ml) in 33/94 HBeAg− patients (Table S2).

Thus, we further analyzed the correlates of HBcrAg positivity in HBeAg− patients.

HBcrAg− and HBcrAg+ groups showed no significant differences in demographics and ALT levels.

In contrast, the HBcrAg+ group presented a higher number of patients with moderate to severe fibrosis and necroinflammatory activity (Table S2).

Regarding viral replication markers, serum HBV-DNA levels were higher in HBcrAg+ patients, while qHBsAg levels showed no significant differences according to HBcrAg status.

The HBcrAg+ group also had higher cccDNA, tHBV-DNA, pgRNA and cccDNA transcriptional activity levels (Table S2).

To further investigate the relationship between HBcrAg and cccDNA activity, we compared HBcrAg− and HBcrAg+ patients with similar amounts of cccDNA.

Since HBcrAg− patients had a cccDNA range between 0.01 and 0.87 copies/cell, we applied the same filter to select for HBcrAg+ patients.

With the same intrahepatic amount, cccDNA was found more transcriptionally active in HBeAg− patients that are HBcrAg+ compared to HBcrAg− HBeAg− patients (Fig. 2).

This is illustrated by the higher levels of pgRNA (median of 0.29 vs. 0.03, p = 0.003) and pgRNA/cccDNA ratio (median of 1.78 vs. 0.23, p = 0.021) in HBcrAg+ vs. HBcrAg− HBeAg− patients.

SECTION

HBcrAg distinguishes a subgroup with higher cccDNA levels and disease activity among low viremic HBeAg− patients

PARAGRAPH

HBeAg− CH patients exhibit a different degree of chronic hepatitis, reflected by ALT levels, fibrosis and necroinflammatory activity scores (Table 1).

Serum HBV-DNA, together with ALT levels, represent a useful marker to distinguish “more” vs. “less” active liver disease in these patients.7

Since HBcrAg and serum HBV-DNA levels were strongly correlated (Fig. 1), we decided to test if HBcrAg levels could still show a correlation with intrahepatic cccDNA activity and liver disease independently of serum HBV-DNA, in low viremic patients.

To this aim, we focused our analysis on a subgroup of 45 HBeAg− patients with serum HBV-DNA <2,000  IU/ml (Table S1).

Twenty-two of them had positive HBcrAg measurement (>3 LogU/ml) and receiver operating characteristic analysis revealed that a HBcrAg threshold value of 4 LogU/ml was able to distinguish patients with mild vs. minimal liver disease (described as fibrosis and/or necroinflammatory activity scores >2 or <1, respectively) (AUC = 0.74; p <0.0001; 95% confidence interval −0.06–0.55; PPV = 0.44; NPV = 0.92) (Fig. 3).

Interestingly, patients with HBcrAg >4 LogU/ml also exhibited higher quantities of cccDNA (median of 0.17 vs. 0.06 copies/cell, p = 0.045) and cccDNA transcription (median of 1.27 vs. 0.08, p = n.s.), but no differences in either HBsAg or ALT levels, with only 4 patients having ALT >ULN (Table S3).

SECTION

Identification of 2 subgroups of HBeAg− patients with different HBcrAg levels

PARAGRAPH

A PCA was conducted on all viral replication markers in the serum (HBV-DNA, qHBsAg and HBcrAg) and in the liver (tHBV-DNA, cccDNA, pgRNA, cccDNA transcriptional activity), as well as on different parameters of liver injury (ALT, fibrosis and necroinflammatory activity score) (Fig. 4).

In PCA plots (Fig. 4A–C), each dot represents a patient and colors distinguish either HBeAg+ from HBeAg− patients (Fig. 4A), HBcrAg rank of log values (Fig. 4B) or the 3 clusters that were identified by k-means analysis (Fig. 4C).

By comparing the plots in Fig. 4A and B, most of HBeAg+ patients had the highest HBcrAg values, whereas the HBeAg− group appeared to be more heterogeneous.

The analysis based on the k-means unsupervised clustering method identified 3 groups, one of which (Cluster 3) is superposed to the HBeAg+ patients subgroup (compare Fig. 4A and C, violet and blue dots, respectively), while the other 2 clusters identified different subgroups among the HBeAg− patients (compare Fig. 4A and C, pink vs. yellow and fuchsia dots).

To better characterize the virus and disease associated variables that are distinctive of each cluster, a heat map was built, followed by hierarchical clustering classification (Fig. 4D).

Cluster 3 was composed of 31 out of the 36 HBeAg+ patients (Table S4).

Cluster 1 and 2 comprised 28 and 64 patients of the 94 HBeAg− patients, respectively.

Cluster 1 presented significantly higher levels of serum HBV-DNA, fibrosis, necroinflammatory activity, intrahepatic tHBV-DNA, pgRNA and cccDNA transcriptional activity than Cluster 2 (Table S4).

No differences were found in cccDNA and qHBsAg levels.

Interestingly, Cluster 1 HBeAg− patients had higher HBcrAg levels (median of 4.9 vs. 3.8 LogU/ml, p <0.0001) (Table S4).

Thus, higher HBcrAg levels identify a subgroup of HBeAg− patients (Cluster 1) with higher HBV replication (serum and intrahepatic HBV-DNA) and cccDNA transcriptional activity (pgRNA and pgRNA/cccDNA ratio) and disease activity (fibrosis and necroinflammatory scores) that cannot be identified either by cccDNA levels and qHBsAg or a combination of both.

The same results were obtained when PCA analysis was applied only to HBcrAg+ patients (data not shown).

PARAGRAPH

Next, we asked whether HBcrAg levels might predict the natural course of HBV infection in untreated patients.

To this aim, we retrospectively collected clinical follow-up data for 98/130 patients (27/32 patients in Cluster 1, 47/65 patients in Cluster 2 and 24/33 patients in Cluster 3, median follow-up of 8.0 years, interquartile range 6.6–12.3) (Fig. 5).

Notably, all the patients in Cluster 1 and 3 fulfilled at a given point of the follow-up the indications for NA treatment according to EASL 2012 Clinical Practice Guidelines.39

Among the Cluster 2 patients included in the follow-up, 25/47 were treated with NAs (8 classified as HBeAg− CI and 17 HBeAg− CH at the study entry) and 22/47 did not (17 classified as HBeAg− CI and 5 HBeAg− CH at the study entry).

Notably, HBcrAg levels did not differ at study entry between the 25 Cluster 2 patients that underwent NA treatment and the 22 patients that did not (3.8 LogU/ml vs. 3.75 LogU/ml; p = n.s.).

Moreover, the 8 HBeAg− CI patients that underwent NA treatment showed a virological and biochemical reactivation during the follow-up, before the beginning of therapy.

Compared to the 17 HBeAg− patients classified as CI at study entry that were not treated, they were older (49.6 vs. 36.0; p <0.03), had a slightly higher histologic inflammatory activity and fibrosis but they showed no differences in ALT (28.5 vs. 28.0 IU/ml; p = n.s.), HBV-DNA (2.8 vs. 2.3, logIU/ml; p = n.s.), qHBsAg (3.3 vs. 3.4 logIU/ml; p = n.s.), or HBcrAg (2.4 vs. 3.1 logU/ml; p = n.s.) levels.

Intrahepatic cccDNA levels were higher (0.13 vs. 0.05; p <0.02) whereas cccDNA transcriptional activity was not different in the 2 groups (0.45 vs. 0.50; p = n.s.).

Focusing on the 22 patients that did not require NA treatment, they all presented, at the last follow-up control, a median of serum HBV-DNA <2,000  IU/ml, all had normal ALT levels with a median qHBsAg <1,000  IU/ml.

Thus, low HBcrAg levels (below 4 LogU/ml) are associated with a milder course of the disease in HBeAg− patients (Fig. 3 and Table S3) and this is confirmed in our follow-up analysis (Fig. 5).

Altogether, these results confirm that low HBcrAg levels are associated with a lower transcriptional activity of the cccDNA and with a more favorable course of the disease, but do not discriminate between patients that meet the current requirement for NA treatment and those that do not.

SECTION

HBcrAg levels do not predict HBsAg loss in NA-treated patients

PARAGRAPH

HBcrAg levels have been shown to be independently associated with response to both NA monotherapy41,42 and pegylated-interferon add-on in HBeAg+ patients.41

Additionally, patterns of HBcrAg changes during treatment are predictive of sustained off-treatment response in this subgroup of patients.41,42

The relation between HBcrAg levels and HBsAg loss is currently unknown.

We sought to determine whether HBcrAg levels might predict HBsAg loss in our followed-up patients.

NA-treated Cluster 3 patients had a better response in term of HBsAg loss than Cluster 1 or Cluster 2 patients (8/24, all HBeAg+ vs. 1/25 HBeAg− vs. 1/26 HBeAg−, respectively) (Fig. 5).

Notably, pretreatment HBcrAg levels did not significantly differ in the 8 HBeAg+ Cluster 3 NA-treated patients who lost HBsAg compared to the 16 HBeAg+ Cluster 3 NA-treated patients who did not (median of 7.8 vs. 8.1 LogU/ml, p = n.s.).

Altogether, pretreatment HBcrAg levels did not correlate with NA-induced HBsAg loss, that appeared to be confined to a subgroup of HBeAg+ CH patients who could not be differentiated by HBcrAg levels.

Compared to the pretreatment levels, HBcrAg levels were significantly lower at the time of HBsAg loss in the 8 HBeAg+ Cluster 3 NA-treated patients (3.7 vs. 8.0 LogU/ml, p = 0.0002) but most of the HBcrAg decline had already occurred at the time of HBeAg seroconversion (4.2 vs. 8.0 LogU/ml, p = n.s.) (Fig. S7, left panel).

A similar decline was observed in HBeAg+ Cluster 3 NA-treated patients who did not reach HBsAg loss when HBcrAg levels were compared between pretreatment and the time of HBeAg seroconversion (7.9 vs. 4.8 LogU/ml), and no further change in HBcrAg levels occurred during the follow-up (Fig. S7, right panel).

Fig. S8 shows the individual HBcrAg follow-up profiles from the 8 HBeAg+ Cluster 3 NA-treated patients who seroconverted for HBeAg and lost HBsAg, 6 of the 16 HBeAg+ Cluster 3 NA-treated patients who seroconverted for HBeAg but remained HBsAg+ and 2 additional Cluster 3 HBeAg+ patients that did not seroconvert for HBeAg under NA treatment.

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

The key determinant of chronicity of HBV infection is the persistence of cccDNA in the infected hepatocytes.2

An accurate monitoring of intrahepatic cccDNA levels and activity during patient management is limited by the need for invasive liver biopsy procedures.

So far, no single serum parameter has been shown to accurately reflect the transcriptional activity of the cccDNA pool in the liver, an important target in the perspective of HBV functional cure.1

As a consequence, there is an unmet need for the identification and characterization of new non-invasive markers for the evaluation of intrahepatic cccDNA and the prediction of successful therapy.

PARAGRAPH

In this study, we investigated the relationship between HBcrAg serum levels and intrahepatic HBV viral markers in a cohort of untreated patients with CHB, who had concomitant serum and frozen liver biopsy samples.

We show that HBcrAg levels reflect viral replication, as they positively correlate with serum HBV-DNA, as well as correlating with serum qHBsAg in HBeAg+ but not in HBeAg− patients.

In HBeAg− patients, HBcrAg should theoretically only recognize HBcAg and the p22cr reactivity (although the detection of HBeAg released from antigen/antibody immune complexes is theoretically possible).

Viral replication and protein synthesis are not necessarily always linked to each other in the HBV lifecycle.2,5,43

In HBeAg− patients, viral genome replication and virion production/release are decreased while HBsAg expression is not affected to the same extent.5,12,18

Whereas transcription from integrated HBV sequences can account for a significant proportion of HBsAg production in these patients, HBcAg and HBeAg necessarily require the full HBV genome template provided by cccDNA.2,20,43

This can explain why we found only a moderate overall correlation between HBcrAg and qHBsAg, and why this correlation is lost in HBeAg− patients as also suggested in a recent study.20

PARAGRAPH

The analysis of the relationship between HBcrAg and intrahepatic viral markers allowed us to further investigate the correlation of HBcrAg with cccDNA quantity and activity.

A positive correlation between HBcrAg levels and liver cccDNA has already been reported by Chen et al.,34 but pgRNA levels were not investigated and, therefore, no direct information on cccDNA transcriptional activity could be deduced.

Honda et al.37 did not find a correlation between cccDNA and HBcrAg in a small subgroup of patients with available liver biopsies under NA treatment, but showed that NA-treated patients with CHB who were positive for HBcrAg (>3.0 logU/ml) had higher levels of cccDNA and pgRNA in the liver than patients who were negative for HBcrAg (<3.0 logU/ml).

Our study provides the first comprehensive evaluation of HBcrAg, qHBsAg and HBV-DNA serum levels and their correlation with all relevant intrahepatic viral markers (cccDNA, pgRNA, tHBV-DNA) in a substantial number of patients with CHB in the different phases of CHB.7

We found that HBcrAg is strongly correlated with tHBV-DNA, cccDNA and pgRNA levels both in HBeAg+ and HBeAg− patients.

Notably, qHBsAg and serum HBV-DNA correlations with the same intrahepatic markers are much weaker.

Moreover, cccDNA transcriptional activity, calculated by pgRNA/cccDNA ratio, is only correlated to HBcrAg and not to qHBsAg in HBeAg− patients, suggesting that HBcrAg is a better surrogate marker of cccDNA transcriptional activity than qHBsAg.

This notion was reinforced by our PCA followed by unsupervised clustering of patients according to serum and intrahepatic viral markers.

Indeed, we could identify 2 subgroups among HBeAg− patients, differing for serum HBV-DNA levels, cccDNA transcriptional activity, HBV-DNA and RNA production, but not for qHBsAg or intrahepatic cccDNA levels.

Further information came from the comparison of HBeAg− patients positive or negative for HBcrAg with comparable amounts of cccDNA.

The 2 groups present the same levels of qHBsAg but different levels of pgRNA and cccDNA transcriptional activity according to HBcrAg status, i.e. patients who tested positive for HBcrAg+ had the highest cccDNA transcriptional activity.

PARAGRAPH

The relationship between HBcrAg and ALT levels has been the object of controversial findings.35,44

Similarly to Maasoumy et al.,29 in our study HBcrAg was only correlated with ALT levels in HBeAg− patients.

The evaluation of liver histology in HBeAg− CH patients allowed us to link higher HBcrAg levels to more severe scores of fibrosis and necroinflammatory activity and to ALT levels >2x normal.

Similarly, HBcrAg+ HBeAg− patients display more severe fibrosis and inflammatory activity than HBcrAg− patients.

Moreover, the analysis of low viremic HBeAg− patients, with serum HBV-DNA <2000  IU/ml, allowed us to highlight a correlation between HBcrAg levels and intrahepatic cccDNA activity and necro-inflammation which was independent from qHBsAg, HBV-DNA and ALT levels.

It is important to underline that the relation between HBcrAg and fibrosis or inflammation is indirect.

Higher HBcrAg levels reflect a sustained HBV replication driven by the transcriptional activity of the cccDNA, that translates into more inflammation and fibrosis progression over time.

Indeed, higher HBcrAg levels have been shown to predict the progression to cirrhosis in HBeAg− patients.45

Intrahepatic HBV-DNA and cccDNA levels decline in HBeAg− CH and HBeAg− infection compared to HBeAg+ CI and CH patients.3,12,34

As a consequence HBeAg− patients tend to have lower HBcrAg, independently of their histology, and many untreated HBeAg− patients test negative for HBcrAg because of their low HBV replication in the liver.

The correlation between HBcrAg levels, necro-inflammation and fibrosis confirmed in this study, as well as others,45 does not exclude the possibility that a proportion of HBeAg− CH patients with long duration of disease, significant fibrosis and low replication may test negative for HBcrAg.

PARAGRAPH

Our cohort included only 4 HBeAg+ patients in the chronic infection stage (Table S1), which limited the evaluation of HBcrAg as a surrogate marker of cccDNA activity in this group of patients.

In any case, our data suggest that the advantage of HBcrAg measurement would be more significant in untreated HBeAg− patients, where the assay does not detect any confounding HBeAg.

In this respect, our results indicate that HBcrAg may represent a useful surrogate marker not only for intrahepatic cccDNA levels, but also for its transcriptional activity.

Moreover, we demonstrated that HBcrAg levels continue to reflect liver disease in low viremic patients with ALT levels in the normal range.

PARAGRAPH

Although our study is cross-sectional, we had the opportunity to retrospectively collect the clinical follow-up data for 98/130 (about 75%) of the patients included in the study.

The follow-up results showed that low HBcrAg levels alone, measured at a single time point, do not discriminate between patients who do or do not meet the current requirement for NA treatment.

Moreover, pretreatment HBcrAg levels did not predict NA-induced HBsAg loss in HBeAg+ patients, while in these patients HBeAg seroconversion represents the major driver of changes in HBcrAg quantification.

PARAGRAPH

The main limitation of the HBcrAg assay is its lower limit of sensitivity.

In this study and in contrast to other reports,29,31,32,46 we used a stringent threshold of 3 LogU/ml according to manufacturer’s recommendation to avoid false positivity, but recent unpublished studies suggest that a threshold of 2.5 LogU/ml might be used in the future (personal communication from Fujirebio).

However, even with this lower threshold only 5 additional patients could be detected.

Overall, one-third of our HBeAg− patients scored negative for HBcrAg despite harboring active cccDNA in their liver, even if at lower levels compared to HBcrAg+ patients.

Prospective studies will be interesting to investigate the outcome of these HBeAg− HBcrAg− patients.

PARAGRAPH

In conclusion, our results indicate that HBcrAg may represent a useful surrogate marker not only for intrahepatic cccDNA levels, but also for its transcriptional activity.

Currently, HBcrAg represents an interesting novel biomarker for the evaluation of new anti-HBV therapies directly or indirectly targeting cccDNA.

In the future, it will have to be compared with other novel biomarkers, such as circulating viral RNAs, when standardized assays become available.

SECTION

Financial support

PARAGRAPH

This work was supported by grants from «Agence Nationale pour la Recherche sur le SIDA et les hepatites virales» (ANRS) to FZ (n°N16003CR) and to FZ and ML (n°ECTZ8323), from the French Research Agency ANR (Agence National de la Recherche) to FZ and ML (RHU cirB-RNA).

SECTION

Conflict of interest

PARAGRAPH

FZ received research grants and consultancy honoraria from Hoffmann-La-Roche, Gilead Sciences, Janssen, Assembly Biosciences, Arbutus, Contravir, Sanofi and Transgene.

ML participates to advisory boards of BMS, Assembly Biosciences, Gilead, Arbutus, Janssen, Galapagos, Medimmune.

PL participates to advisor and speaker bureau for Gilead, Roche, BMS, GSK, MSD, Arrowhead and Alnylam.

SECTION

Authors’ contributions

PARAGRAPH

BT, PL, ML, FZ conceived the experiments.

BT, FL, CM, FB performed experiments and analyzed data.

FL, SC, SM, FF, AL collected clinical samples and patients’ information.

BT, PL, ML, FZ wrote the manuscript.