10.1016/j.jhep.2018.05.021

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Intestinal HIF-1α deletion exacerbates alcoholic liver disease by inducing intestinal dysbiosis and barrier dysfunction

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Alcoholic liver disease (ALD) ranges from hepatic steatosis to steatohepatitis, cirrhosis, and, potentially, hepatocellular carcinoma.1

While alcohol induces deleterious effects in the liver, it also disrupts gut microbiota homeostasis and intestinal epithelial integrity resulting in increased permeability, bacterial translocation and release of bacteria-derived endotoxin into the circulation.2–4

Clinical and experimental studies have demonstrated that serum levels of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) are indeed increased in alcoholic individuals.5,6

LPS binding to Toll-like receptors on the surface of Kupffer cells leads to an elevated pro-inflammatory cytokine production, which, in turn, damages hepatocyte function.7,8

PARAGRAPH

Intestinal barrier function is key to preventing the increased bacterial translocation by alcohol.5,9,10

Goblet cells in the intestinal epithelium produce protective trefoil factors and mucins, which are abundantly core glycosylated and either localized to the cell membrane or secreted into the lumen to form the mucus layer.11,12

The mucus is the first barrier that intestinal bacteria meet, and pathogens must penetrate it to reach the epithelial cells.13–15

Intestinal Paneth cells produce antimicrobial peptides that are retained in the mucus layer, thereby concentrating their bactericidal activity close to the epithelium.

Together, Paneth and Goblet cells prevent bacterial invasion to some extent, and thereby play a prominent role in the innate immune surveillance of the gut.12

The paracellular space in the intestinal epithelium is sealed by tight junctions (TJ), which regulate the flow of small molecules through the composition of claudins and other proteins in the junctional complex.16

IgA production and other intestinal immune-regulations provide protection against bacterial transcytosis.17

Recent studies demonstrate that targeting intestinal barrier function may be an effective strategy in the prevention/treatment of ALD.18

PARAGRAPH

The intestines are supported by an extensive underlying vasculature, and are therefore susceptible to conditions related to diminished blood flow and concomitant tissue hypoxia.19,20

It is now clear that responses to hypoxia include transcriptionally regulated gene expression coordinated by the transcription factor hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF).21

HIF-1α and HIF-2α have been implicated in transcriptional regulation of anti-inflammatory or tissue-protective-signaling pathways.22–24

A number of barrier-protective genes are critically regulated by HIF-1α, including intestinal trefoil factor (ITF [TFF3]), CD73 (NT5E), P-glycoprotein (P-gp [ABCB1]), cathelicidins, claudin-1, mucin-3 and β-defensin-1 (DEFB1).19,25–30

While hypoxia is an important factor for HIF-1α protein stabilization, there are also a number of factors other than hypoxia, such as LPS, that regulate HIF-1α expression and accumulation.31

While acute LPS increased HIF-1α, prolonged exposure supressed HIF-α expression.32

PARAGRAPH

Disruption of epithelial HIF-1α resulted in an increased epithelial permeability, as shown in murine colitis models.33–36

Our previous study showed that long-term exposure to alcohol decreased epithelial HIF-2α protein expression in mice.37

We also demonstrated that knockdown of HIF1/2α resulted in increased permeability and decreased transepithelial electrical resistance in Caco-2 cells.37,38

PARAGRAPH

In the present study, we discovered that intestinal epithelial-specific Hif1a knockout (IEhif1α−/−) worsens alcohol-induced liver injury.

We showed that alcohol exposure in IEhif1α−/− mice resulted in a more severe dysbiosis, increased hepatic bacterial products, and liver injury.

IEhif1α−/− mice had decreased levels of antimicrobial peptide in the intestine and an increased intestinal inflammation.

Probiotic administration decreased alcohol-induced liver injury in wild-type (WT) mice but not in IEhif1α−/− mice.

Sterilizing the gut using non-absorbable antibiotics attenuated liver injury in IEhif1α−/− mice.

Our results suggest that targeting intestinal HIF-1α may be a strategy for preventing ALD.

SECTION

Materials and methods

SECTION

Animal models

PARAGRAPH

Intestinal epithelial-specific Hif1a knockout (IEhif1α−/−) mice were generated by crossing Hif1αfl/fl (B6.129-Hif1αtm3Rsjo/J, C57/BL background, Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME) and a transgenic strain expressing Cre recombinase under the control of the murine villin promoter (B6.Cg-Tg (Vil-cre) 997Gum/J, C57/BL background, Jackson Laboratory).

Intestinal deletion of Hif1a was confirmed by PCR of the intestinal and liver tissues.

IEhif1α−/− mice have decreased HIF-1α expression in the intestine, but not in the liver (Fig. S1A), which was further validated by Western blotting of intestinal and liver tissues of the mice treated with a chemical hypoxia inducer CoCl2.

CoCl2 induced a prominent increase in HIF-1α protein in the liver, but the changes were minimal in intestine, indicating the effectiveness of the epithelial-specific HIF-1α deletion (Fig. S1B).

It has to be noted that epithelial-specific knockout of Hif1a did not completely deplete intestinal HIF-1α expression, as residual HIF-1α protein was still observed in the whole knockout intestine tissue.

This is because HIF-1α is also expressed in other intestinal cell types in addition to epithelial cells.

PARAGRAPH

Eight to ten-week old male mice (WT (Cre mice) and IEhif1α−/−) were pair-fed the Lieber-DeCarli liquid diet containing alcohol (AF) or isocaloric maltose dextrin (PF).

In the first week, all groups of mice were given modified Lieber-DeCarli liquid diet without alcohol to acclimate the mice to the liquid diet.

Starting at week 2, alcohol was gradually introduced and increased to 5% (w/v) by the end of the week and was continued at 5% for 24 days.

This modified Lieber-DeCarli diet contained 17% of energy as protein, 40% as fat, 7% as carbohydrate, and 35% as either alcohol (5% w/v) or isocaloric maltose dextrin (Research Diets, New Brunswick, NJ).

A group of mice was treated with non-absorbable antibiotics (Polymyxin B, 150 mg/kg BW/day and Neomycin, 200 mg/kg BW/day) at day 12 of the 5% alcohol-feeding period.

Control mice were gavaged daily with an equal volume of vehicle (water).

Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG (LGG) was supplemented to one group of mice at a dose of 109 colony forming units/day.

A group of mice was administered with 8 mg of dimethyloxalylglycine (DMOG, Cayman Chemical, Ann Arbor, MI) intraperitoneally every other day for the last two weeks of ethanol diet feeding.

Some intestinal tissues of mice treated with alcohol using the same protocol described above for 48 days (from another study) were used for HIF-1α analysis.

PARAGRAPH

All mice were housed in a pathogen-free, temperature-controlled animal facility with 12 h light/12 h dark cycle.

All animal protocols were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the University of Louisville.

PARAGRAPH

For further details regarding the materials used in this study, please refer to the CTAT table and the supplementary information.

SECTION

Results

SECTION

IEhif1α−/− mice have exacerbated alcohol-induced hepatic steatosis

PARAGRAPH

We examined the intestinal expression of HIF-1α in mice treated with alcohol at different time points.

Intestinal Hif1a mRNA expression was increased with 12- and 24-day alcohol exposure, but decreased with 48-day exposure (Fig. 1A).

We hypothesized that intestinal HIF-1α upregulation is an adaptive response to alcohol exposure, and prolonged alcohol treatment damages this adaptive mechanism.

Depleting HIF-1α may disrupt this HIF-1α-mediated intestinal homeostasis and result in liver injury.

Therefore, we used IEhif1α−/− mice to examine the intestine and liver pathophysiology in response to 24-day alcohol treatment.

mRNA levels of Hif1a in IEhif1α−/− mice decreased significantly in the intestine, but not in the liver (Fig. S1A).

To further confirm the deletion effectiveness, the chemical hypoxia inducer, CoCl2, was administered to mice via intraperitoneal injection, and liver and intestine HIF-1α protein was immunoblotted.

CoCl2 induced a prominent increase in HIF-1α protein in the liver, but the changes were minimal in the intestine (Fig. S1B).

The residual expression of HIF-1α in the intestinal tissue of IEhif1α−/− mice was due to the expression of HIF-1α in other types of intestinal cells, such as dendritic cells,39 intestinal macrophages40 and T cells.41,42

PARAGRAPH

Chronic alcohol feeding decreased the survival rate of IEhif1α−/− mice compared to WT mice (Fig. 1B).

IEhif1α−/− mice had a pronounced increase in hepatic steatosis, compared to the WT mice after alcohol treatment (Fig. 1C and 1D).

Liver to body weight ratio was not changed in WT mice, but significantly increased in IEhif1α−/− mice (Fig. 1E).

Liver triglyceride level was increased in WT mice, but markedly increased in the IEhif1α−/− mice (Fig. 1F).

Alcohol feeding significantly increased hepatic Srebp1 mRNA level in both WT and IEhif1α−/− mice, but the effect was much greater in IEhif1α−/− mice, indicating an increased lipogenesis in IEhif1α−/− mice upon alcohol exposure (Fig. 1G).

PARAGRAPH

Fasting serum glucose level was slightly decreased by alcohol feeding in WT mice.

However, the KO mice had significantly higher glucose levels (Fig. S2A).

Lipid panel measurements showed that levels of serum triglyceride, total cholesterol, LDL, HDL and VLDL were slightly lower in WT mice, but significantly increased in IEhif1α−/− mice (Fig. S2B-2F).

SECTION

Alcohol increases hepatic inflammatory response in IEhif1α−/− mice

PARAGRAPH

Alcohol feeding increased hepatic inflammation in IEhif1α−/− mice.

As shown (Fig. 2A), IEhif1α−/− mice had an increased infiltration of cytotoxic neutrophils (chloracetate esterase staining) in the liver.

Additionally, immunohistochemical staining using F4/80 revealed more macrophages in the livers of IEhif1α−/− mice (Fig. 2B).

More intense neutrophil infiltration and macrophage activation in livers of IEhif1α−/− mice were associated with elevated gene expression of the pro-inflammatory factors, Tnf and Il6, and the chemokine Mcp1 (Ccl2) (Fig. 2C, 2D and 2E).

Hepatic TLR4 protein increased in IEhif1α−/− mice after alcohol exposure (Fig. S3).

Serum level of alanine aminotransferase (ALT) was increased in both WT and IEhif1α−/− mice (Fig. 2F).

Taken together, these results demonstrate that IEhif1α−/− mice have enhanced hepatic steatosis and inflammation upon chronic alcohol exposure.

SECTION

Alcohol increases hepatic fibrosis in IEhif1α−/− mice

PARAGRAPH

IEhif1α−/− mice had a significant increase in Sirius Red positive area compared to WT mice (Fig. S4A).

The gene expression of fibrogenic factors, collagen α1 (Col1a1) and αSMA (Acta2) were marginally increased in the WT mice, but were significantly increased in IEhif1α−/− mice (Fig. S4B and 4C).

This suggests that intestinal epithelial HIF-1α depletion exacerbates hepatic fibrosis following alcohol exposure.

SECTION

IEhif1α−/− mice exhibit gut dysbiosis

PARAGRAPH

Previous studies showed that ALD is associated with gut dysbiosis and endotoxin release.

We next determined whether gut bacterial homeostasis and the translocation of bacterial products are affected by the absence of intestinal Hif1α.

As shown (Fig. 3A), total bacterial load was unchanged in the WT mice, but significantly increased in the IEhif1α−/− mice after 24 days of chronic alcohol feeding, indicating a bacterial overgrowth.

Metagenomic analysis showed that alcohol feeding markedly increased phylum levels of Bacteroidetes and decreased Firmicutes in IEhif1α−/− mice (Fig. 3B).

The ratio of Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes was not altered by alcohol exposure in the WT mice, but was significantly decreased in the KO mice (Fig. 3C).

Further analysis showed that Akkermansia spp. (Akk) was increased in IEhif1α−/− mice but not in the WT mice (Fig. 3D).

Interestingly, Lactobacillus spp. was decreased by alcohol in WT mice, and was almost undetectable in IEhif1α−/− mice (Fig. 3E).

These data indicated that IEhif1α−/− mice had exacerbated gut dysbiosis following 24-day alcohol exposure.

PARAGRAPH

Gut bacterial homeostasis is regulated by multiple antimicrobial peptides, which are secreted by the intestinal epithelium.

Alcohol exposure decreased the numbers of Goblet cells in the mucosal tissues of both WT and IEhif1α−/− mice, but the effect was greater in IEhif1α−/− mice (Fig. S5).

β-defensins are the dominant class of antimicrobial peptides secreted by the epithelium.

The gene expression of Defb1 and Defb2 was increased by alcohol exposure in the ileal tissue of WT mice, while it remained unchanged in the IEhif1α−/− mice (Fig. 3F and 3G).

Cathelicidin-related antimicrobial peptide (Cramp) is the only member of cathelicidin antimicrobial peptide family in mice.

Alcohol exposure significantly reduced Cramp expression in both WT and IEhif1α−/− mice (Fig. 3H).

SECTION

Induction of HIF in the intestinal epithelial cells inhibits mouse fecal bacterial growth

PARAGRAPH

The role of intestinal HIF-1α in gut bacterial growth was further analyzed in an in vitro assay.

Human T84 intestinal epithelial cells were incubated with DMOG (Dimethyloxaloylglycine), a HIF-1α activator.

The conditioned medium was added to the mouse fecal bacterial culture, and bacterial growth rate was determined.

Neither DMOG itself nor control medium changed the fecal bacterial growth over a period of 6 h. DMOG-conditioned medium, presumably containing stimulated antimicrobial peptides, significantly inhibited bacterial growth (Fig. 4A).

However, this inhibitory effect was abolished when using the medium from the HIF-1α dominant negative (HIF-1αDN) plasmid transfected cells, indicating HIF-1α-mediated secreted factors from epithelial cells likely possess antimicrobial capacity.

To further confirm whether HIF-1α activation can increase antimicrobial capabilities, we determined antimicrobial peptide expression.

The gene expression of human DEFB1 and DEFB2 and human cathelicidin-related antimicrobial peptide (LL-37 [or CAMP]) was increased significantly by DMOG in T84 cells (Fig. 4B-D).

Protein levels of LL-37 in the DMOG-conditioned medium were increased, but were reduced in the medium of HIF1α-DN transfected cells (Fig. 4E).

These results indicate that HIF-1α activation increases antimicrobial peptide expression in epithelial cells.

SECTION

HIF1α-deficiency induces intestinal barrier dysfunction after chronic alcohol exposure

PARAGRAPH

Increased bacterial product translocation indicates intestinal barrier dysfunction.

Immunofluorescent staining showed a decreased expression of TJ proteins, occludin and claudin-1, in the ileal tissues of WT mice after alcohol exposure.

Importantly, these decreases were more severe in IEhif1α−/− mice (Fig. 5A and 5B).

The decreased TJ protein expression was associated with the disruption of intestinal protective factors, such as ITF and P-gp.

The protein level of ITF was significantly lower in the IEhif1α−/− mice compared to the WT mice (Fig. 5C).

Furthermore, P-gp plays an important role in overall intestinal barrier integrity, and it was upregulated by alcohol in WT mice.

This adaptive increase was, however, eliminated in the IEhif1α−/− mice (Fig. 5D).

SECTION

Alcohol increases intestinal inflammatory response in IEhif1α−/− mice

PARAGRAPH

Histologic examination revealed a prominent inflammatory response in the ileum of IEhif1α−/− mice exposed to alcohol (Fig. 6A).

Alcohol feeding significantly increased macrophage-like appearance in Peyer’s patches (PPs), a major component of the gut-associated lymphoid tissue, serving as important antigen entry sites in mucosal immunity.

The PP domes were irregular, and the surrounding villi were sparse and atrophic (Fig. 6A), indicating an increased intestinal inflammatory response in the small intestines of IEhif1α−/− mice exposed to alcohol.

We further analyzed alcohol-induced intestinal inflammation.

Immunofluorescent analysis revealed an increased number of cells expressing F4/80 in alcohol-treated-IEhif1α−/− mice compared with WT mice (Fig. 6B).

Intestinal inflammation was further confirmed by the increased mRNA levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines, Il6, Il1b and Tnf (Fig. 6C-6E).

SECTION

Alcohol increases intestinal permeability

PARAGRAPH

Increased intestinal barrier damage and inflammation leads to higher intestinal permeability and induces greater bacteria translocation.

To further determine the role of epithelial HIF-1α in alcohol-induced translocation of bacteria/bacterial products to the liver, we analyzed circulating LPS concentration and Escherichia coli (E. coli) protein in the liver.

Serum LPS level was slightly elevated by alcohol feeding in the WT mice, but significantly increased in IEhif1α−/− mice (Fig. S6A).

Furthermore, hepatic content of E. coli protein was increased in WT mice following alcohol exposure, and this increase was more pronounced in IEhif1α−/− mice, as evaluated by immunofluorescent staining of hepatic tissues (Fig. S6B).

SECTION

Antibiotic sterilization of the gut reduces alcohol-induced liver fat accumulation and injury

PARAGRAPH

To further elucidate the role of gut bacteria in alcohol-induced liver steatosis and injury in IEhif1α−/− mice, non-absorbable antibiotics (ABx; Polymyxin B and Neomycin) were administered to the mice exposed to alcohol for 12 days.

ABx treatment decreased hepatic fat accumulation (Fig. 7A), liver triglyceride levels (Fig. 7B) and serum ALT levels (Fig. 7C) in IEhif1α−/− mice.

These results support the concept that gut dysbiosis is critical in alcohol-induced hepatic steatosis and injury in the IEhif1α−/− mice.

SECTION

HIF-1α is required for the protective effect of Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG in ALD

PARAGRAPH

Our previous studies have shown that the probiotic, LGG, protects against ALD by increasing intestinal HIF signaling and modifying gut bacterial homeostasis.37,38

In this study, we tested whether HIF-1α is required for the protective effects of LGG.

IEhif1α−/− and WT mice were fed 5% (w/v) alcohol for 10 days and a single dose of alcohol was gavaged in the morning of the last day (NIAAA model).43

LGG was administered by gavage at a dose of 109 colony forming units/day along with alcohol exposure.

Consistent with our previous study, LGG administration significantly reduced hepatic fat accumulation in WT mice.

However, this protective effect was diminished in IEhif1α−/− mice (Fig. 8A and 8B).

Plasma ALT and aspartate aminotransferase level showed a modest improvement with LGG treatment in WT mice, but not in IEhif1α−/− mice (Fig. 8C and 8D).

In addition, LGG supplementation increased fecal butyrate concentration in WT, but not in IEhif1α−/− mice (Fig. 8E).

Intestinal barrier-protective gene expression of claudin-1 and P-gp was upregulated in the WT mice, but not in the IEhif1α−/− mice following LGG treatment.

These results suggest that HIF-1α is required for the beneficial effects of LGG in the reduction of steatosis in ALD.

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

The gut-liver axis plays an important role in the pathogenesis of chronic liver disease.

Intestinal dysbiosis and the disruption of the intestinal barrier integrity by alcohol are prominent features of ALD.

Previous studies demonstrated that alcohol exposure-associated changes in gut metabolites and antimicrobial peptide production contribute to ALD.5,9,18

The mechanisms by which alcohol disrupts the antimicrobial peptide response leading to dysbiosis and intestinal barrier dysfunction are not fully understood.

In this study, we showed that deletion of intestinal HIF-1α increased gut dysbiosis and altered intestinal integrity, resulting in exacerbated liver steatosis, inflammation, fibrosis and injury.

PARAGRAPH

Our previous studies have shown that long-term (8 weeks) alcohol exposure decreased HIF-2α protein levels in mouse intestine and increased gut leakiness and liver injury.37

A recent study demonstrated that high fat diet treatment promotes HIF-2α activation but not HIF-1α signaling in the intestine, which contributes to hepatic steatosis in obesity through ceramide metabolism mediated by Neu3 regulation.44

However, the role of intestinal HIF-1α in ALD has not been evaluated.

The increase in HIF-1α signaling resulting from the relatively short alcohol exposure (12 and 24 days) likely represents an adaptive upregulation.

However, this adaptive response is decreased by prolonged alcohol exposure.

How intestinal HIF-1α is regulated in alcoholic patients is not yet known, but the expression of intestinal claudin-1, an HIF-1α target, was reduced in alcoholic cirrhosis patients.45

PARAGRAPH

Pathogenic bacteria overgrowth and reduction of beneficial bacteria constitute gut dysbiosis in ALD.

The gut microbiota homeostasis is controlled by bacteria-bacteria and bacteria-host interactions under both healthy and diseased conditions.

Alcohol exposure disrupts microbiota homeostasis.

However, the gut mucosal response has adaptive mechanisms to restore homeostasis by increasing antimicrobial substances.

We postulate that epithelial HIF-1α represents such an adaptive mechanism.

Alcohol exposure for 24 days modestly changed gut microbiota homeostasis in WT mice.

However, depletion of intestinal epithelial HIF-1α resulted in a more severe dysbiosis.

The IEhif1α−/− mice had reduced fecal Firmicutes and increased Bacteroidetes.

Such a change has been shown in a mouse model of ALD using intragastric feeding.46

At the bacterial species level, Akk, gram-negative anaerobic bacteria, were not affected by alcohol in WT mice, but were increased in the IEhif1α−/− mice.

The role of Akk in ALD remains elusive.

Supplementation with Akk showed a protective effect in ALD,46 while endogenous increase of Akk may impact the intestinal innate immune system and facilitate bacterial translocation by degrading the intestinal mucus.47–49

The causal relationship between an intestinal increase in Akk and intestinal integrity needs further study.

Interestingly, Lactobacillus bacteria were markedly depleted by 24-day alcohol exposure in WT mice, and this decrease was greater in IEhif1α−/− mice.

A recent study demonstrated that Lactobacillus utilized saturated long-chain fatty acids, which were beneficial in ALD treatment.50

A short-chain fatty acid, butyrate, plays an essential role in epithelial cell nutrition and intestinal physiology.

Butyrate regulates epigenetic processes through histone deacetylation inhibition.

Intestinal consumption of butyrate causes local hypoxia leading to increased HIF-1α expression.51

Although Lactobacillus itself does not produce butyrate, studies have shown that Lactobacillus promotes eubiosis, thereby resulting in increased butyrate production.

Butyrate-producing bacteria are mainly in the phylum Firmicutes, which was decreased by alcohol in our study.

Furthermore, the decrease of Lactobacillus in ALD is consistent with the beneficial effect of LGG supplementation on ALD as shown by several groups.37,38,52–54

PARAGRAPH

HIF-1α is a master transcription factor regulating a variety of genes in the intestine.

Antimicrobial peptides, DEFB1 and LL-37, are regulated by HIF-1α.27,30

Paneth cell-derived β-defensins and epithelial cell- and microphage-derived CRAMP regulate gut microbiota homeostasis.

Our results showed that β-defensins were adaptively increased and CRAMP was decreased by alcohol exposure in WT mice.

However, depleting HIF-1α eliminated β-defensin upregulation and further decreased CRAMP.

This, at least partially, explains why IEhif1α−/− mice developed dysbiosis following alcohol exposure.

In contrast, activation of HIF-1α in epithelial T84 cells inhibited bacterial growth and increased antimicrobial gene expression.

In vivo activation of HIF-1α by DMOG demonstrated a partial prevention of ALD (Fig. S7A and 7B).

However, this observation is not conclusive because DMOG treatment is not intestine specific.

While intestinal HIF-1α might be beneficial in ALD, hepatic activation of HIF-1α showed contradictory results.55,56

The causative role of gut dysbiosis in IEhif1α−/− mice in ALD was further demonstrated by sterilization of the gut using non-absorbable antibiotics.

PARAGRAPH

IEhif1α−/− mice had an increase in intestinal permeability in ALD, which has been shown in inflammatory bowel disease.28,33

Subsequently, bacteria and bacterial products translocate to the systemic circulation and liver.

Indeed, IEhif1α−/− mice displayed a higher LPS level in the serum and increased E. coli protein in the liver after alcohol feeding.

LPS binds to TLR4 on hepatocytes and Kupffer cells resulting in a hepatic fat accumulation and inflammation, which is an established and well-studied mechanism in chronic ALD.

PARAGRAPH

In addition to the effect of HIF-1α on antimicrobial peptide regulation, HIF-1α also regulates several critical factors that are important in intestinal barrier integrity.

P-gp functions as a pump by expelling translocated xenobiotics and bacterial toxins from the enterocytes into the intestinal lumen.26

ITF is a mucus modifier that helps to maintain a dynamic mucus layer.19

Claudin-1 is a major tight junction protein in the intestinal epithelium.28

Reduction in ITF, claudin-1 and P-gp in IEhif1α−/− mice following alcohol exposure destabilizes gut barrier function, resulting in an elevated LPS concentration in serum and E. coli protein in the liver.

In addition, alcohol exposure increases intestinal Cyp2E1 expression,57 which is responsible for the production of reactive oxygen species.

Furthermore, alcohol feeding significantly increased intestinal inflammation in IEhif1α−/− mice.

Taken together, these multiple mechanisms contribute to the exacerbated gut barrier dysfunction in IEhif1α−/− mice in ALD.

PARAGRAPH

Our previous studies demonstrated that the probiotic, LGG, is beneficial in preventing/treating ALD in mice.

However, the beneficial effects were diminished when HIF-1α was deleted in the intestine.

LGG is able to increase the luminal concentrations of long-chain fatty acids and short-chain fatty acids in mice exposed to alcohol.

Lactobacilli, in turn, metabolize saturated fatty acids to promote their growth.

Supplementation with tributyrin, a prodrug of butyrate, protects from intestinal tight junction disruption by alcohol.45

Currently, it is still unclear as to how butyrate protects TJs.

However, butyrate metabolism in the intestine consumes oxygen and stabilizes HIF-1α,51 which protects the intestinal barrier.

Thus, it is likely that LGG promotes butyrate-producing bacteria growth, and the resulting butyrate production increases HIF-1α stabilization and protects the intestinal barrier.

Intestinal HIF-1α depletion abolishes this protective effect of LGG against alcohol-induced intestinal barrier disruption.

PARAGRAPH

In conclusion, our findings demonstrate that intestinal epithelial HIF-1α is critically involved in the intestinal pathogenesis of alcohol-induced barrier disruption and subsequent liver injury.

HIF-1α activation regulates gut bacterial homeostasis through increasing antimicrobial peptides and stabilizes barrier function via upregulation of P-gp and tight junction proteins.

Because systemic activation of HIF-1α may have deleterious effects in the liver, our study suggests that dietary approaches and pharmacological agents that specifically activate intestinal HIF-1α could be developed to prevent/treat ALD.

SECTION

Financial support

PARAGRAPH

The work presented in this study was supported by NIH grants R21AA002416, R01AA023190, R01AA023681, R01AA020265, R01AA021434, U01AA022489, U01AA021901, P50AA024337, P20GM113226, the VA (1I01BX002996-01A2) and grants from National Natural Science Foundation of China (81370481, 81770585, 81600466, 81570514).

SECTION

Conflicts of interest

PARAGRAPH

The authors declare no conflicts of interest that pertain to this work.

PARAGRAPH

Please refer to the accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.

SECTION

Authors’ contributions

PARAGRAPH

T.S. performed experiments and drafted manuscript, Z.G., F.L., C.Z., L.L., L.Z., Y.L., Q.L., L.H. and V. J. performed experiments, H.D. and S.B. provided some samples.

Y.C., C.M., Y.C., S.B., S-Y.C.,

X. Z. and R.W. involved in conceptual discussion, and W.F. and C.M. conceived project, designed the study and wrote the manuscript.