10.1016/j.jhep.2019.05.030

ABSTRACT

TITLE

Liver infiltrating T cells regulate bile acid metabolism in experimental cholangitis

PARAGRAPH

T cells are central mediators of liver inflammation and represent potential treatment targets in cholestatic liver disease.

Whereas emerging evidence shows that bile acids (BAs) affect T cell function, the role of T cells for the regulation of BA metabolism is unknown.

In order to understand this interplay, we investigated the influence of T cells on BA metabolism in a novel mouse model of cholangitis.

PARAGRAPH

Mdr2−/− mice were crossed with transgenic K14-OVAp mice, which express an MHC class I restricted ovalbumin peptide on biliary epithelial cells (Mdr2−/−xK14-OVAp).

T cell-mediated cholangitis was induced by the adoptive transfer of antigen-specific CD8+ T cells.

BA levels were quantified using a targeted liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry-based approach.

PARAGRAPH

T cell-induced cholangitis resulted in reduced levels of unconjugated BAs in the liver and significantly increased serum and hepatic levels of conjugated BAs.

Genes responsible for BA synthesis and uptake were downregulated and expression of the bile salt export pump was increased.

The transferred antigen-specific CD8+ T cells alone were able to induce these changes, as demonstrated using Mdr2−/−xK14-OVAp recipient mice on the Rag1−/− background.

Mechanistically, we showed by depletion experiments that alterations in BA metabolism were partly mediated by the proinflammatory cytokines TNF and IFN-γ in an FXR-dependent manner, a process that in vitro required cell contact between T cells and hepatocytes.

PARAGRAPH

Whereas it is known that BA metabolism is dysregulated in sepsis and related conditions, we have shown that T cells are able to control the synthesis and metabolism of BAs, a process which depends on TNF and IFN-γ.

Understanding the effect of lymphocytes on BA metabolism will help in the design of combined treatment strategies for cholestatic liver diseases.

