10.1016/j.jhep.2017.12.027

ABSTRACT

TITLE

Cardiopulmonary hemodynamics and C-reactive protein as prognostic indicators in compensated and decompensated cirrhosis

PARAGRAPH

The main stages of cirrhosis (compensated and decompensated) have been sub-staged based on clinical, endoscopic, and portal pressure (determined by the hepatic venous pressure gradient [HVPG]) features.

Vasodilation leading to a hyperdynamic circulatory state is central in the development of a late decompensated stage, with inflammation currently considered a key driver.

We aimed to assess hepatic/systemic hemodynamics and inflammation (by C-reactive protein [CRP]) among the different sub-stages of cirrhosis and to investigate their interrelationship and prognostic relevance.

PARAGRAPH

A single center, prospective cohort of patients with cirrhosis undergoing per protocol hepatic and right-heart catheterization and CRP measurement, were classified into recently defined prognostic stages (PS) of compensated (PS1: HVPG ≥6 mmHg but <10 mmHg; PS2: HVPG ≥10 mmHg without gastroesophageal varices; PS3: patients with gastroesophageal varices) and decompensated (PS4: diuretic-responsive ascites; PS5: refractory ascites) disease.

Cardiodynamic states based on cardiac index (L/min/m2) were created: relatively hypodynamic (<3.2), normodynamic (3.2–4.2) and hyperdynamic (>4.2).

PARAGRAPH

Of 238 patients, 151 were compensated (PS1 = 25; PS2 = 36; PS3 = 90) and 87 were decompensated (PS4 = 48; PS5 = 39).

Mean arterial pressure decreased progressively from PS1 to PS5, cardiac index increased progressively from PS1-to-PS4 but decreased in PS5.

HVPG, model for end-stage liver disease (MELD), and CRP increased progressively from PS1-to-PS5.

Among compensated patients, age, HVPG, relatively hypodynamic/hyperdynamic state and CRP were predictive of decompensation.

Among patients with ascites, MELD, relatively hypodynamic/hyperdynamic state, post-capillary pulmonary hypertension, and CRP were independent predictors of death/liver transplant.

PARAGRAPH

Our study demonstrates that, in addition to known parameters, cardiopulmonary hemodynamics and CRP are predictive of relevant outcomes, both in patients with compensated and decompensated cirrhosis.

