10.1016/j.jhep.2019.01.010

ABSTRACT

TITLE

Radiation-primed hepatocyte transplantation in murine monogeneic dyslipidemia normalizes cholesterol and prevents atherosclerosis

PARAGRAPH

Inherited abnormalities in apolipoprotein E (ApoE) or low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) function result in early onset cardiovascular disease and death.

Currently, the only curative therapy available is liver transplantation.

Hepatocyte transplantation is a potential alternative; however, physiological levels of hepatocyte engraftment and repopulation require transplanted cells to have a competitive proliferative advantage of over host hepatocytes.

Herein, we aimed to test the efficacy and safety of a novel preparative regimen for hepatocyte transplantation.

PARAGRAPH

Herein, we used an ApoE-deficient mouse model to test the efficacy of a new regimen for hepatocyte transplantation.

We used image-guided external-beam hepatic irradiation targeting the median and right lobes of the liver to enhance cell transplant engraftment.

This was combined with administration of the hepatic mitogen GC-1, a thyroid hormone receptor-β agonist mimetic, which was used to promote repopulation.

PARAGRAPH

The non-invasive preparative regimen of hepatic irradiation and GC-1 was well-tolerated in ApoE−/− mice.

This regimen led to robust liver repopulation by transplanted hepatocytes, which was associated with significant reductions in serum cholesterol levels after transplantation.

Additionally, in mice receiving this regimen, ApoE was detected in the circulation 4 weeks after treatment and did not induce an immunological response.

Importantly, the normalization of serum cholesterol prevented the formation of atherosclerotic plaques in this model.

PARAGRAPH

Significant hepatic repopulation and the cure of dyslipidemia in this model, using a novel and well-tolerated preparative regimen, demonstrate the clinical potential of applying this method to the treatment of inherited metabolic diseases of the liver.

