10.1016/j.jasrep.2018.08.047

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Investigating 14th century immigration and settlement response on the Georgia Coast, USA

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Climatic instability is one of the greatest natural challenges facing human groups.

Drought, in particular, has been a major stressor of subsistence and sociopolitical systems.

Droughts vary in geographic and temporal scale, sometimes intermittent and local, and occasionally decadal and regional.

Human responses to drought vary in kind.

For example, in the American Southwest, a significant disruption in normal rainfall patterns between 1250 CE and 1450 led to the abandonment of the Kayenta and Greater Mesa Verde regions (Cameron, 1995; Dean and Funkhouser, 1995; Hill et al., 2004; Lekson and Cameron, 1995; Mills et al., 2015).

Decades of study have shown that these two cases of abandonment and migration led to very different social outcomes for both migrants and locals based on the cultural and environmental contexts of their respective homelands and destinations (Clark and Lyons, 2012; Mills, 2011; Ortman, 2012; Ortman et al., 2014; Stone, 2015).

PARAGRAPH

These cases from the American Southwest are notable due to the high resolution in chronology, climate, and settlement that has been accessible to researchers.

However, other cases of abandonment and movement have also been reported in North America.

For example, researchers in the Eastern Woodlands of the United States have documented several cases of abandonment and population movement (Cobb and Butler, 2002; Krus and Cobb, 2018; Meeks and Anderson, 2013; Snow, 1995, 1996; Willey, 1953).

One well-documented example is the abandonment of the Middle and Lower Savannah River Valley (SRV) at some point during the latter half of the 14th century.

The 14th century was a period of environmental stress in the Savannah River Valley, with dendrochronological analysis revealing below-average rainfall resulting in estimated harvest shortfalls during 12 of the 19 years from 1359 CE to 1377 (Anderson et al., 1995).

Perhaps as a result, the complex societies of the SRV abandoned their settlements and mound centers by 1400 CE (Anderson, 1994; Stephenson et al., 2015).

This abandonment marked the collapse of several Mississippian chiefdoms that had occupied the valley for the previous 150 years.

PARAGRAPH

At the mouth of the Savannah River on the Georgia Coast, the beginning of the Irene phase (1300–1580 CE) coincided with abandonment of the SRV.

At that time, the northern Georgia Coast saw an expansion of settlement (Pearson, 1978; Sipe, 2013; Thomas, 2008c), incorporation of Mississippian stylistic motifs and ritual goods (Moore, 1897), and increased use of maize in the diet as observed in coastal bioarchaeological assemblages (Larsen et al., 2002; Thomas, 2008c).

These changes have not been adequately explained.

The current, implicit understanding is that these transformations occurred through an ill-defined, and incomplete, process of “Mississippianization” that arrived late on the Mississippian periphery (see Thomas, 2008a:309–312).

I do not find the concept of Mississippianization to be clarifying here; what is important, however, is that adoption of the Mississippian iconographic lexicon and maize agriculture has been linked to processes of human movement (Beck, 2003; Blitz and Lorenz, 2002; Cobb and King, 2005; Pauketat, 2003; Willey, 1953; Williams, 1994).

PARAGRAPH

The Georgia Coast seems a likely destination for former residents of the SRV, being easily reached via the Savannah River.

Neighboring regions also appear to have received immigrants from the abandoned river valley.

These regions surrounding the SRV, namely the Oconee, Pee Dee and Wateree river valleys, all experienced some degree of disruption coincident with abandonment of the SRV.

Beck (2013) argued that the appearance of Late Mississippian Lamar ceramics from Georgia in the Carolina Piedmont, along with changes in the settlement system in that region, suggest that at least some former residents of the SRV made their way to the east.

Similarly, Williams (1994) documented a population decline at the Shoulderbone site concomitant with the SRV abandonment and a complete depopulation of the site by 1450 CE.

Some have suggested that Shoulderbone functioned as a protective buffer between the Oconee and Savannah River Valleys during a period of increasing political tensions (Anderson, 1994; Beck, 2013; Williams, 1994).

However, after the SRV was abandoned, a defensive gateway settlement would have no longer been necessary.

In addition, the Georgia Coast, like other coastal regions, was linked to the interior through the exchange of marine shell beads (Pearson and Cook, 2012; Trubitt, 2003).

These exchange networks were likely mediated through matrimonial relationships, which have also been argued to structure migratory decision making (Brown and Kerber, 1990; Burmeister, 2000).

Nevertheless, these lines of evidence, although compelling, are circumstantial.

PARAGRAPH

Evidence of migration tends to be found at the scale of individual sites.

In particular, ceramics and domestic architecture have been used as material correlates to identify population movements (e.g., De Roche, 1983; Haviland, 1972; Milner, 1986; Rouse, 1986; Stone, 2015; Warrick, 2008).

Unfortunately, the archaeological record of the Georgia Coast does not include these necessary criteria.

The Lamar-series ceramics noted by Beck (2013) in the Carolina Piedmont long precede the abandonment of the SRV on the Georgia Coast.

In fact, a high degree of similarity in both temper and style in Mississippian ceramics across most of the state of Georgia suggests that the types of interpersonal connections that structure individual decisions that fundamentally comprise migration events had existed between several of the regions in question for some time.

However, the presence of similar ceramic throughout much of Georgia during this time precludes identification of a classic “site-unit intrusion” (sensu Smith, 1984).

Further, in the case of the Georgia Coast, our understanding of Late Prehistoric domestic architecture is limited by the small sample of excavated structures (see Keene and Garrison, 2013).

Therefore, recognizing a large-scale population movement from the SRV to the Georgia Coast via these traditional methods is currently not possible.

PARAGRAPH

Analysis of regional settlement data, along with a growing regional radiocarbon database, provides another method to evaluate population dynamics.

I used both settlement analysis and Bayesian modeling of radiocarbon data to evaluate the character and timing of shifts in settlement practices on the Georgia Coast relative to the timing of abandonment of the Savannah River Valley.

Determining the timing and nature of settlement changes will improve our understanding of these regional socio-political transformations and the role of immigration in those changes.

PARAGRAPH

A number of approaches can be used to derive population estimates from settlement data.

Warrick (2008) organized these approaches based on how closely the estimates approximate actual population numbers.

At the grossest scale, population sizes can be estimated based on the carrying capacity of the environment, provided that information about environmental conditions and subsistence practices and technologies is available.

This can be made more precise through inclusion of historical census data and material remains such as artifacts, food remains, and burial assemblages.

PARAGRAPH

Settlement-based methods rely on ethnographic and ethnohistorical analogies, where archaeological measures of house and room counts, number of hearths, or total roofed area are related to specific numbers of people (Warrick, 2008:55–64).

Such data are more difficult to obtain, requiring either extensive horizontal excavation or high-resolution, expansive shallow geophysical surveys where extant surface remains do not exist, such as in the American Southeast.

Because contract archaeological survey projects contribute most of the settlement data available through state archaeological site files, these data are rarely available for conducting population reconstructions, especially at regional scales.

PARAGRAPH

Another approach is to use total settlement area, rather than household-level areal estimates, to calculate population size (Warrick, 2008:69–70).

This approach would likely produce less accurate estimates than methods based on intra-settlement data, but state site files are more likely to include information about total settlement area.

For example, more than half of all entries in the Georgia Archaeological Site File (GASF) have a real data.

However, at least for the GASF, there is another major issue in using site file data for population estimates.

In Georgia, when areal data are available, site area is not differentiated based on occupational component.

Population estimates are synchronic in nature and, if there is no ability to control for time in the areal data, this method would ultimately be insufficient to investigate changing populations through time.

Even with these issues, state site file databases are still the best source of regional data, providing a way to examine population dynamics at the scale required to observe regional abandonments and resulting population movements.

SECTION

Methods

PARAGRAPH

Site file data can be used to analyze population movements because population movements of a sufficient scale should be identifiable based on rates of change in the number of archaeological components that either exceed or fall below expected rates of growth.

To calculate the rate of change, we can restructure mathematical equations of population growth.

Although population growth is limited by a number of factors that mean that increases in the human population will never be strictly exponential, archaeological components only increase in number (natural and cultural site destruction notwithstanding).

With the growth in archaeological components being a strictly compounding process, I can reorganize a mathematical formula for growth, such as the curve proposed by Malthus (1798) for unconstrained, exponential population growth,P=Poertwhere a population, P, equals the initial population, PO, multiplied by the mathematical constant e to the power of time, t, multiplied by the rate of change, r, per unit of t, such that, if the values of the other variables are known, calculating the rate of change in a population over a given period of time is possible using the formula:r=lnPPot

PARAGRAPH

This restructured equation remains reliant on population estimates for the beginning and end of a defined period of time.

However, for an estimate of the rate of change in a population, a proxy for initial population and final population measures will suffice.

PARAGRAPH

Human populations tend to steadily increase over the long term, but fluctuate over the short-term.

Archaeological components are similar; sites may be occupied or abandoned in the short-term, but the total number of components increases over the long-term.

As such, rates of archaeological component accumulation in a region can serve as a proxy for the rate of population growth, given a few assumptions.

One assumption is that socio-ecological systems (i.e., settlement, subsistence, and social organization) remain static during defined spans of time.

Conveniently, delineations between major archaeological periods tend to mark significant and observable transformations in these systems.

Also, we must assume that a certain number of components is needed to support a certain, albeit unknown, population in a given settlement system.

PARAGRAPH

With these assumptions, we can substitute P and PO with C and CO, respectively, where C = the total number of archaeological components within span t, CO = the initial number of occupied components at the start of span t, and r(C) = the rate of change in number of archaeological components per unit of t, resulting in the following equation:rC=lnCCot

PARAGRAPH

This allows calculation of the rate of accumulation of archaeological components.

Although real population levels and rates of population growth cannot be determined using this method, this equation allows comparison of the rates at which new archaeological components were created by a population across a span of time.

Further, this calculation allows comparison of multiple regions and across temporal boundaries within regions.

This, in turn, can inform the identification of population movements, given sufficient change in rates of component accumulation.

PARAGRAPH

My source of settlement data was the Georgia State Archaeological Site File, specifically a copy of the site file database created on 9 March 2010 in the form of an ESRI.shp file.

Sites for the analysis were selected from the Sea Islands/Coastal Marsh Ecoregion (Fig. 1).

To control for uneven site discovery, St. Catherines Island was also used as a discrete sample region because, unlike most of the rest of the region, the island has been systematically surveyed (Thomas, 2008a, 2008b, 2008c).

Sites in these areas were categorized as either multiple or single component occupations.

Components were then attributed to specific archaeological periods as used in the GASF database, and rates of co-occurrence of components were calculated for the portion of the coast north of the Altamaha River (Table 1).

PARAGRAPH

To calculate CO, the number of components occupied in preceding periods was used.

For example, 57.66% of Middle Woodland sites remained occupied, or were subsequently reoccupied, during the Late Woodland (Table 1).

Therefore, CO for the Late Woodland period would equal 57.66% of the total number of multiple component sites dating to the Middle Woodland, rounded to the nearest integer (i.e., 79).

PARAGRAPH

Understanding how changes in settlement practices relate to regional population movements requires accurate assessment of the timing of both the SRV abandonment and of settlement transformation on the Georgia Coast.

Bayesian statistical techniques have been used to address both new and long-standing chronological questions (see Bayliss, 2009; Bayliss and Bronk Ramsey, 2004; Culleton et al., 2012; Hamilton and Kenney, 2015; Kennett et al., 2014; Krus and Cobb, 2018; Krus et al., 2015; Pluckhahn et al., 2015; Ritchison, 2018; Turck and Thompson, 2016).

Bayesian methods, in contrast to traditional statistical techniques, rely on probability curves, a priori information, and numerous iterative permutations.

Archaeologists can take advantage of Bayesian techniques because radiocarbon dates are fundamentally probability curves, comprising a date and an uncertainty.

Further, seriated sequences and stratigraphic information are ideal a priori data for constraining the potential results of a Bayesian chronological model.

In Bayesian chronological modeling, sequence and phase models are used to account for variation in dates by grouping or separating them based on contextual information (Bayliss, 2009; Bronk Ramsey, 2009; Culleton et al., 2012; Krus, 2016).

These phases can represent single events, archaeological strata, or even an entire occupation span of a site or component, depending on the intentions of the modeler or limitations of the data.

In Georgia, Bayesian techniques have been used to better understand the timing of activities at Etowah and its surroundings (Krus, 2016; Lulewicz, 2018), evaluate human response to environmental change in the Late Archaic on the coast (Turck and Thompson, 2016), evaluate the timing of monument construction and regional abandonment in the Savannah River Valley (Stephenson et al., 2015), and evaluate the accuracy of the ceramics-based chronology of the Georgia Coast (Ritchison, 2018).

PARAGRAPH

Chronologies for the Georgia Coast place the start of the Irene period at the end of the Savannah period at about 1300 CE (DePratter, 1991; Ritchison, 2018; Thomas, 2008c) based on the sequencing of ceramic types as well as a robust set of radiocarbon dates.

A start date of 1300 CE for the Irene period proposed by Deagan and Thomas (2009:61) was based on a summed probability distribution, using many of the same radiocarbon dates included in this model.

Summed probability plots have been a favored approach in studies of large, regional radiocarbon datasets.

Proponents of the method suggest that identified patterns reflect demographic or other occupational trends (Armit et al., 2013; Bamforth and Grund, 2012; Deagan and Thomas, 2009; Shennan and Edinborough, 2007; Smith et al., 2008; Thomas, 2008c).

Although patterns evident in summed probability distributions likely reflect human activity, several investigators have noted potential sources of bias in this method (Brown, 2015; Surovell and Brantingham, 2007; Williams, 2012).

PARAGRAPH

Settlement data for the coast from the GASF show that, during the Irene period, the ratio of single component sites to multicomponent sites increased over previous periods, reflecting regional adoption of what Jones (1978) termed the ‘dispersed town’ settlement pattern (Table 2).

Therefore, the timing of the appearance of new single component sites should reflect the start of settlement dispersal, a hypothesis that can be tested using Bayesian methods.

Turck and Thompson (2014) compiled a substantial radiocarbon database far the Georgia Coast, and Bayesian analysis of this dataset has already clarified other relationships between changing environmental conditions and transformations in settlement systems (Turck and Thompson, 2016).

PARAGRAPH

As an alternative to the use of summed probabilities, I used Bayesian methods to test the timing of settlement dispersal.

Dates from the radiocarbon database produced by Turck and Thompson (2014) were first selected based on their association with Irene ceramics.

Given that primary documentation of sampling methodologies and excavation contexts is often unclear or absent, dates without specifically noted Irene ceramic associations were not included.

Additionally, dates with an uncertainty of over 90 years were excluded because dates with long probability “tails” can stretch the results of the Bayesian model to such a degree that the method becomes unproductive.

Following these initial sorting criteria, 50 dates spanning 10 sites remained (Table 3, Fig. 2).

These dates were then placed in two groups: those found in association with Irene ceramics from multi-component sites and those from apparent single-component Irene sites.

PARAGRAPH

The single-component group included seven sites and 29 individual dates, whereas the multi-component group included 21 dates from only three sites and thus may not be fully representative.

The two groups of dates were calibrated and modelled independently as single phase models in OxCal 4.2 (Bronk Ramsey, 2009; Reimer et al., 2013).

Phase models allow grouping of dates together, effectively instructing the modeling software that, based on external information, these several dates together represent a singular occurrence, whether it is a rapid event or a long-term cultural practice.

By grouping dates, the overall probabilistic range of the dates is reduced, minimizing the effects of “wiggles” in the radiocarbon calibration curve (Bronk Ramsey, 2009; Stephenson et al., 2015).

PARAGRAPH

Models are evaluated in terms of their significance based on their A values, an index value related to overall agreement of the individual dates with the a priori information used to structure the model.

Both whole models and individual dates are given A values, with an A index over 60 signifying acceptable agreement (Bronk Ramsey, 2009).

Models are typically run in an iterative manner, with the goal of gradually increasing the accuracy of a model as problematic dates are identified and individually assessed.

These individual assessments are key to producing an internally coherent model when working with legacy dates that have been collected, sampled, and tested by different researchers using different methods, and often lacking sufficient contextual information (Graf, 2009).

Using this process, I identified two dates from the multicomponent model and four from the single component model as outliers.

With the multicomponent model, those marked as outliers were several centuries outside the accepted range of dates for the Irene period and had questionable contextual associations.

Similarly, outliers in the single component model were either originally from mixed context features or were too old based on accepted chronologies.

SECTION

Results

SECTION

Settlement

PARAGRAPH

Using the formula for rates of component accumulation derived above, the results of the rate calculations are shown in Tables 4 and 5.

Note that the value for t in this calculation was specifically chosen to be generally applicable throughout the American Southeast and does not reflect a specific chronology.

This was done to allow for future cross-regional comparisons using the same formula.

PARAGRAPH

The Late Archaic period experienced the second greatest rate of component accumulation of any period on the Georgia Coast at 0.41% growth per year (Table 4).

This reflects the initial colonization of the region.

Although the region may have been occupied prior to the Late Archaic, it is roughly at the beginning of this period that sea levels approached modern levels and the estuary formed.

This rate of accumulation is lower than that on St. Catherines Island (Table 5).

Growth in the Early Woodland period steeply declined to a growth rate of only 0.08%.

This pattern supports the findings of other settlement and chronological analyses that suggest the Early Woodland was a time of population decline on the coast as the shoreline retreated, potentially resulting in the collapse of the previously highly productive estuary (Thompson and Turck, 2009; Turck and Thompson, 2016).

PARAGRAPH

The Middle Woodland and Late Woodland periods exhibited accumulation rates of 0.25% and 0.23% per year, respectively.

The accumulation rate during the Early Mississippian period declined to 0.15% per year, but this may be due, at least in part, to the proportion of the GASF database consisting of sites from the systematic survey of St. Catherines Island where the Late Woodland, Early Mississippian, and Middle Mississippian, periods are combined into a single “St. Catherines” period (Thomas, 2008b:423).

This causes some confusion in the GASF database for St. Catherines Island, where there were no Early Mississippian components, but there are examples of Middle Mississippian components (Table 5).

PARAGRAPH

The Middle Mississippian period experienced an accumulation of components at a rate of 0.40% per year for the coast as a whole, and a rate of 0.51% for St. Catherines Island.

These rates of accumulation are substantially higher than in preceding periods, but some of this growth may be due to the mislabeling of components in the GASF database as mentioned previously (e.g., user error where St. Catherines period components were entered as Savannah period components due to inconsistencies between database fields and the original site forms).

However, errors would likely not account for a substantial portion of the growth rate over earlier periods because the entire coastal region saw a marked increase in the number of components created during the Middle Mississippian compared to the Early Mississippian (Table 4).

PARAGRAPH

The Late Mississippian period experienced the highest rate of component accumulation of any archaeological period on the Georgia Coast at 0.86% per year.

An even higher rate of 1.24% is seen on the systematically surveyed St. Catherines Island.

The Late Mississippian period is one of the shortest periods in the regional chronology, and also exhibits the greatest number of total components of any period (Tables 4 and 5).

PARAGRAPH

The Historic Indian period, often known as the Altamaha period, shows a rate of accumulation less than the preceding Late Mississippian period (i.e., 0.41%), but still substantially higher than that in the Woodland and Early Mississippian periods.

Although equal to that of the Late Archaic period, this rate of accumulation occurs over a shorter period of time and comprises substantially fewer components.

As with the Late Mississippian period growth, this rate seems to suggest a transformation of settlement, this time coinciding with European contact.

This shift in settlement has already been discussed and is supported by this settlement analysis (Worth, 2007).

PARAGRAPH

This analysis demonstrates that rates of component accumulation varied over time, with the rate of growth during the Late Mississippian period more than double that during the previous period in both regions.

Although the calculated values for r(C) do not directly equate to population growth rates (Tables 4 and 5), the relationship between growth rates across components likely represents mirrored trends in population growth within and between these periods.

SECTION

Radiocarbon

PARAGRAPH

The multi-component model places the beginning of the Irene phase in first half of the 13th century, sometime between cal.

1205–1265 CE (at a 68.2% confidence interval) (Table 6, Fig. 3), earlier than the conventionally accepted start date between 1300 CE and 1350 CE (Deagan and Thomas, 2009; DePratter, 1991).

The multi-component model represents the creation of the “Irene” ceramic type, whereas the single-component model represents the span of time during which single-component sites were established and utilized.

Given that materials in the archaeological record, especially those signaling identity in some manner, follow patterns of increasing and decreasing popularity, limited production of Irene ceramics likely began before they become ubiquitous and mark the start of the Irene period.

This pioneering production is likely what is represented in the multi-component model, with sites where the dates were recovered being occupied prior to the Irene period and with occupation then continuing throughout the period.

PARAGRAPH

The single component model places the start of the Irene phase between cal.

1355–1400 CE (at a 68.2% confidence interval) (Table 7, Fig. 4).

This suggests that single component sites, a key element of “dispersed towns”, appeared, at minimum, almost a century after the initial production of Irene ceramic wares and at least several decades after the commonly recognized beginning of the Irene period.

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

The Bayesian models demonstrate that initial settlement of many of the single component sites occurred at least half a century after the recognized start of the period.

To relate settlement dispersal, as seen in the establishment of these single component Irene sites, to a potential emigration from the SRV, we must compare the timing of these two events.

PARAGRAPH

Stephenson et al. (2015) used a multi-method approach to better understand the chronology of the Middle Savannah River chiefdoms, employing both ceramic seriation and Bayesian modeling.

The ceramic seriation included 10 sites in the Middle SRV, representing farmsteads, villages, and mound centers.

The chronological ordering of these sites was then used as the a priori specifications for a sequence model in OxCal 4.2.

By grouping their set of 44 dates by site, and by provenience when applicable, and placing these groups in the order predicted by the ceramic frequency seriation, Stephenson et al. (2015:181) constrained the probability distributions of their radiocarbon dates to create precise measures of occupation span at each of the sites.

Their results show that six of the 10 sites in their model had occupations that ended between cal.

1376 CE and cal.

1386 CE; only one of the 10 sites persisted longer (until cal.

1398 CE).

Included among these six sites are five of the region's mound centers, including Spring Lake, Red Lake, Hollywood, Lawton, and Mason's Plantation.

PARAGRAPH

Although the terminus ante quem of the Middle Savannah River Valley abandonment has been placed at circa 1450 CE (Anderson, 1994), Stephenson et al. (2015) suggested that major centers depopulated rapidly, potentially in a single decade at the end of the 14th century.

Settlement evidence from the Savannah River Site demonstrates that, prior to complete abandonment of the region, residents of the valley reoccupied the uplands following the collapse of the centralized mound centers (Stephenson et al., 2015).

However, the degree to which reoccupation of the uplands accounted for the populations of these major centers remains unclear.

PARAGRAPH

The timing of abandonment of the SRV, compared to the Savannah-to-Irene phase transition, strongly suggests coastal immigration.

Following Stephenson et al. (2015), abandonment of the major population centers of the Middle SRV occurred during the period of initial settlement dispersal on the Georgia Coast, suggesting a strong temporal relationship between the two events, which would likely have been predicated upon immigration.

PARAGRAPH

Because abandonment of the SRV and the dispersal of settlements on the Georgia Coast occurred during the same span of a few decades, and migration seems probable, settlement data can potentially provide insight concerning the process of and response to this mass population movement event.

One assumption of the equation used to calculate the rate of component accumulation is that no significant changes in settlement practices occurred during the course of the analyzed time period and this was assumed to be the case for the Late Mississippian “dispersed town.”

As mentioned previously, during this period on the Georgia Coast, people adopted a regionally novel settlement pattern referred to as a “dispersed town” (Jones, 1978), a pattern featuring central towns surrounded by dispersed, affiliated homesteads, agricultural fields, and other resource collection and processing locales.

Although the appearance of single component sites later in the Irene period casts doubt on the assumption of no change in settlement practices, this discrepancy would only affect the results of the rate of change calculations in a downward manner, minimizing and not inflating the apparent rate of component accumulation.

If most of the growth occurred during a short period of time, then the resulting rate of growth for the entire period would be lower than it actually was, lessening the apparent effect of any rapid, but short-lived, increase in growth rate.

The calculated rate then is a conservative estimate, averaging rates of growth over time, with faster or slower rates of growth possibly occurring at shorter time scales.

PARAGRAPH

In the latter portion of the 15th century, along with this shift in settlement practice, maize agriculture became more important in the diet of coastal peoples during the Late Mississippian period (Larsen et al., 2002:64).

Population growth rates are typically higher after adoption of agriculture due to non-proportional increases in both fertility and mortality rates (Hassan, 1981; Warrick, 2008).

Because Irene-period residents of the Georgia Coast increasingly adopted agricultural subsistence practices into their economies, some degree of endemic population growth would be expected.

However, there is no reliable way to distinguish the relative contributions of local population growth and immigration to the rate of component accumulation.

PARAGRAPH

Although rates of component accumulation have not been calculated for the southern portion of the Georgia Sea Islands/Salt Marsh Ecozone, rates of co-occurrence and measures of continuity suggest that the northern Georgia Coast experienced a more dramatic shift in settlement, and potentially in population, than the southern coast (Table 8).

The trend of significant discontinuity in Late Mississippian settlement is most obvious in the St. Catherines Island data.

In the northern and southern coastal regions, the Middle Mississippian period appears to exhibit the most significant discontinuity in settlement.

The level of continuity in the Late Mississippian period for the northern Georgia coast is half that of the southern coast (Table 8), suggesting a greater transformation in settlement practices along the northern coast.

Comparison of known rates of population change with the calculated rate of component accumulation reveals higher rates of accumulation than expected based on in situ population growth.

Population growth rates for hunter-gather groups have been estimated to range from 0.008% to 0.05% per year (Hassan, 1981; Peros et al., 2010).

Accepted rates of population growth in early agricultural societies are only marginally higher, with estimates ranging from 0.008–0.013% growth per year for the Old World Neolithic (Carneiro and Hilse, 1966) to 0.07–0.11% for the Pueblo I through Pueblo IV periods in the southwestern United States (Schlanger, 1988; Zubrow, 1975).

Thus, an accumulation rate of up to 1% per year seems unlikely without a corresponding increase in population due to immigration, particularly when growth rates during earlier periods were less than half that during the Irene period.

PARAGRAPH

The latter half of the 14th century was clearly a time of significant change for people occupying the coastal zone of Georgia.

My results make clear that the ways of life of both residents and migrants were suddenly ruptured and decisions made in this context constitute the changes observed in the archaeological record in the Irene phase.

Often, transformative events are conceptualized only as a swift rupture in the schemas and resources constituting social structure (Beck et al., 2007).

However, if events force creative adjustments, relinking material resources to virtual schemas in innovative ways (Beck et al., 2007:835; Sewell, 2005), they can then be conceived as occurring not only rapidly, but over longer periods of time as the process of structural restoration necessitates.

On the Georgia Coast, this may have been over the course of a generation, as people spread across the landscape and established sites in locations that had seen no human settlement for the previous 3000 years.

PARAGRAPH

Although the decision-making process that led to this settlement change requires further study, the Irene site stands as an example of this sort of reorganization and may provide clues as to why coastal residents, both old and new, so dramatically altered many of their cultural practices.

The Irene site was occupied before, during, and after the abandonment of the SRV.

At around 1400 CE, the multi-stage platform mound that was the main feature of the built environment of the site up to that point was symbolically capped, and transformed into a large conical burial mound (Caldwell and McCann, 1941).

Along with the capping of the platform mound, a new council house was constructed, along with other changes in the use of space and public buildings.

With the Irene site occupying a position as the gateway to the Coast from the SRV, a change in political practice at Irene may have been yet another reason why the displaced, disenfranchised former residents of the chiefly centers of the SRV might have found the coast an appealing destination.

PARAGRAPH

Recently, Saunders (2017) argued that alterations in the built environment, along with an almost universal adoption of the filfot cross motif on coastal stamped ceramics, represented a revitalization movement.

The filfot cross motif first appeared on the Georgia Coast as early as 1265 cal.

AD (Ritchison, 2018), although that estimate is somewhat earlier than commonly recognized (Deagan and Thomas, 2009; DePratter, 1991).

Saunders (2017:59) pointed out that the four-armed filfot cross is representative of This World, which is iconographically in opposition to the Upper World or Below World that were of predominant concern for Mississippian chiefs (see also Reilly, 2004).

The appearance of the filfot motif occurred during the end of the Savannah phase on the coast, a phase characterized politically as a time of a few weakly integrated chiefdoms (Pluckhahn and McKivergan, 2002).

On the coast, then, a turn away from the concerns of the Upper World, or at least in so far as that realm was the exclusive purview of the elite, may have preceded the collapse of the Savannah River chiefdoms by at least a century.

PARAGRAPH

Changing diets at the Irene site may also reflect these changes.

Maize became a more significant part of the diet of coastal peoples after 1300 CE (Larsen et al., 2002:64; Thomas, 2008c:1077), but at Irene at this time, the rate of maize consumption appears to drop (Larsen et al., 1992).

Maize production and consumption was an integral element of Mississippian societies.

Maize provided an avenue for the production of surpluses necessary for the establishment of institutionally ranked societies in the interior Eastern Woodlands, as it had elsewhere in Mexico and Mesoamerica.

Maize also figured prominently in the iconography associated with Mississippian chiefly authority (Emerson, 1997).

Anderson (1994:186) suggested that intensive maize cultivation was mandated by the elites of the SRV chiefdoms in order to maintain the political status quo and to further individual agendas.

Thompson (2009:464) proposed that political leaders at Irene may have chosen to distance themselves from the failed or failing interior polities of the SRV by reorienting themselves away from valley towards the coast, in part through a change in foodways.

Such a change in foodways would be a highly visible alteration in practice that could signal this turn to residents and potential migrants alike.

At Irene, the maize-based political economies of the SRV chiefs were replaced with the marine and estuarine resources of the coast.

Even as maize consumption increased throughout the coast following 1300 CE as farmers and their subsistence practices migrated to the coast, the reduction, but not outright rejection, of maize consumption at Irene could be seen as a rebuke of the political system centered upon its cultivation.

PARAGRAPH

Though, as mentioned, perhaps the most noticeable change at Irene would have been in its built environment.

Thompson (2009) argued that the spatial reorganization of the Irene site, coincident with the abandonment of the SRV, reflected a change in the strategy of political actors.

Both Thompson (2009) and Saunders (2017) argued that the capping of the platform mound at Irene represented a rejection of previous political structures, but disagree as to the nature of the drivers behind this change.

In addition, the construction of a council house suggests residents at Irene wished to make the performance of leadership a more public practice.

Instead of conducting their roles of governance atop a platform mound, screened on all sides by palisades, leaders would have had to surround themselves on all sides by community members in council meetings.

Were savvy political actors creatively altering the concept of political authority by adopting a more inclusive, performative system of authority and control, or were the residents of Irene rejecting a system of hierarchy that privileged ritual knowledge and status over the concerns of the material world?

Both would be reasonable responses to the collapse of a system of chiefly authority that had structured the worldviews and interpersonal relationships of SRV residents for centuries.

And these options, while presented in opposition, are not mutually exclusive.

These motivations of leaders and residents would each be understandable if some, or many, of the Late Mississippian residents of Irene were formerly from mound centers such as Hollywood, Red Lake, or Lawton.

For a disaffected subject of a SRV chiefdom, migration to the Georgia Coast would have offered a highly visible alternative from a rigid system of social ranking, maintained through the performance of exclusive ritual knowledge that had failed to support itself through a slight environmental downturn in a period of increasing inter-regional tensions.

PARAGRAPH

Understanding the cultural information conveyed in the built environment, Thomas (2008c:1063) suggested that additional community-level data are needed to better understand the Irene transition.

Although settlement and radiocarbon analyses provide some insight concerning the nature of Irene demography and growth, a clearer understanding of the degree and nature of internal social and spatial dynamics of the 14th and 15th century Georgia Coast awaits further data.

Without community-level investigations at Savannah and Irene sites, both those that were occupied prior to the collapse of the SRV chiefdoms and those settled in the aftermath, we can neither accurately estimate the populations involved in the process, nor evaluate the exact nature of change in socio-political practices.

What we have learned from the excavations at Irene reveal just how useful this direction of study can be.

SECTION

Conclusion

PARAGRAPH

Following abandonment of the major mound centers of the Middle Savannah River Valley, circa cal.

1380 CE, and the almost complete abandonment of the region by 1450 CE, available evidence suggests that the Georgia Coast received some number of immigrants.

Based on rates of component accumulation, quantification of settlement continuity, and Bayesian chronological modeling of settlement behavior, the latter half of 14th century and beginning of the 15th was a time of significant change on the Georgia Coast.

During this period, my analyses suggest that the number of occupied sites increased by 50%, almost certainly due to migration of people from the Savannah River Valley to the Georgia Coast.

In addition to instigating rapid changes in settlement practice, these migrants may have also contributed to other cultural changes along the Georgia coast, including the adoption, or proliferation, of new stylistic motifs (Moore, 1897; Saunders, 2017), as well as the introduction of maize agriculture (Larsen et al., 2002; Thomas, 2008a) and new political systems (Saunders, 2017; Thompson, 2009).

PARAGRAPH

As noted by Pauketat (2003), the resettlement of displaced populations often plays a major role in “cultural construction.”

On the Georgia Coast, additional study is needed to better understand how the changes observed in the material signatures of the transition between the Savannah and Irene periods correlate to changes in social identity and practice.

PARAGRAPH

This settlement analysis provides evidence of another large-scale population movement in the Southeastern United States.

Nearly three decades ago, Anthony (1990, 1992) suggested that archaeologists had been too quick to turn away from population movements as explanatory factors.

With the development of more easily accessible digital databases of settlement and chronological data, we can apply new methods to reinvestigate our regional chronologies for evidence of the population movements that undoubtedly shaped not only the histories of the pre-contact American Southeast, but of peoples around the world.