10.1016/j.jhep.2018.10.034

ABSTRACT

TITLE

Evaluation of a micro-spectrometer for the real-time assessment of liver graft with mild-to-moderate macrosteatosis: A proof of concept study

PARAGRAPH

Liver macrosteatosis (MS) is a major predictor of graft dysfunction after transplantation.

However, frozen section techniques to quantify steatosis are often unavailable in the context of procurements, and the findings of preoperative imaging techniques correlate poorly with those of permanent sections, so that the surgeon is ultimately responsible for the decision.

Our aim was to assess the accuracy of a non-invasive pocket-sized micro-spectrometer (PSM) for the real-time estimation of MS.

PARAGRAPH

We prospectively evaluated a commercial PSM by scanning the liver capsule.

A double pathological quantification of MS was performed on permanent sections.

Initial calibration (training cohort) was performed on 35 livers (MS ≤60%) and an algorithm was created to correlate the estimated (PSM) and known (pathological) MS values.

A second assessment (validation cohort) was then performed on 154 grafts.

PARAGRAPH

Our algorithm achieved a coefficient of determination R2 = 0.81.

Its validation on the second cohort demonstrated a Lin’s concordance coefficient of 0.78.

Accuracy reached 0.91%, with reproducibility of 86.3%.

The sensitivity, specificity, positive and negative predictive values for MS ≥30% were 66.7%, 100%, 100% and 98%, respectively.

The PSM could predict the absence (<30%)/presence (≥30%) of MS with a kappa coefficient of 0.79.

Neither graft weight nor height, donor body mass index nor the CT-scan liver-to-spleen attenuation ratio could accurately predict MS.

PARAGRAPH

We demonstrated that a PSM can reliably and reproducibly assess mild-to-moderate MS. Its low cost and the immediacy of results may offer considerable added-value decision support for surgeons.

This tool could avoid the detrimental and prolonged ischaemia caused by the pathological examination of (potentially) marginal grafts.

This device now needs to be assessed in the context of a large-scale multicentre study.

