10.1016/j.jasrep.2018.09.018

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Exploring the potential of human bone and teeth collagen from Prehistoric Cyprus for isotopic analysis

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

In the Eastern Mediterranean and the Near East, most of the C and N stable isotope studies have been conducted on the Neolithic period (Lange-Badré and Le Mort, 1998; Lösch et al., 2006; Papathanasiou, 2003; Richards et al., 2003).

Some Bronze Age materials (e.g. Triantaphyllou et al., 2008; Vika, 2009, 2015) and materials from more recent periods (e.g. Byzantine; Bourbou and Richards, 2007) has also been analysed, mainly in Greece.

These local studies mainly indicate the lack of marine resources in human diet even close to the sea, and give some information regarding herding practices and plant consumption.

In contrast, studies have rarely been conducted on Cypriot materials whatever the chronological period.

The heterogeneity of collagen preservation is also highlighted, and collagen is often difficult to extract, especially in the arid areas of the Near East (Lange-Badré and Le Mort, 1998; Papathanasiou, 2003).

In the case of Cyprus there are some data from Neolithic sites but a lack of isotopic and palaeodietary data for Chalcolithic and Bronze Age populations is in contrast to the greater range of archaeological data available.

This initial bioarchaeological study aims to contribute towards understanding ancient diet from Prehistoric Cyprus by using bone and teeth collagen extraction and elemental and stable isotope (carbon and nitrogen) analyses.

This research focuses on (1) the evaluation of the organic preservation (collagen reliability for stable isotope analysis) in human bone and teeth, and (2) if the previous step is successful, the evaluation of human protein intake in comparison with contextual archaeological data, in order to discuss some hypotheses in regard to human palaeodiets on Cyprus.

SECTION

Sites and contexts

PARAGRAPH

Our research focused on six Neolithic-Chalcolithic and Bronze Age sites of Cyprus: Souskiou-Laona settlement (Souskiou-Laona Operation A, SL_S Op.

A; Peltenburg et al., 2006; Lorentz, 2016) and cemetery (Souskiou-Laona Operation C, SL_C Op.

C; Crewe et al., 2005; Lorentz, 2016; ca. 3000 BCE cal., Paphos district, Chalcolithic), Kissonerga-Mylouthkia (KMyl; Peltenburg, 2003; 8600–3500 BCE cal., Paphos district, Neolithic-Chalcolithic), Kalavasos-Kokkinoya (KKok; Clarke, 2007; ca. 4000 BCE, Larnaca district, Chalcolithic), Psematismenos-Trelloukkas (PseTre; Georgiou et al., 2011; Lorentz, 2016; Larnaca district, Early Bronze Age), and Karmi-Palealona (KPal; Webb et al., 2009; Frankel and Webb, 2004; Kyrenia district, Early-Middle Bronze Age) (Fig.1).

These sites are located in different locations and show different burial modes.

The data provided by the geological map of Cyprus (Devillers, 2005; Cohen et al., 2012) indicate a significant lithological and sedimentological variability for each site studied.

PseTre and Kalavasos-Kokkinoya are located at the limit between the Cretaceous, Upper Pliocene and Quaternary deposits (South coast of Cyprus).

Kissonerga-Mylouthkia site is located in the Quaternary deposits (West coast of Cyprus).

Souskiou-Laona site is between the Triassic-Lower Cretaceous and Quaternary deposits (West coast of Cyprus), and Karmi-Palealona in the Middle-Upper Miocene and Pleistocene deposits (North coast of Cyprus).

PARAGRAPH

Zooarchaeological studies performed on several Cypriot sites furnished first information on subsistence strategies.

As a general observation, the hunting still an important food supply until the Chalcolithic period and then decreases through time (Croft, 1991).

Hunting is focused on fallow deer (Dama mesopotamica) which was, on certain sites, the main meat supply fraction (ca. 70%) compared to herded species as sheep and goat for Neolithic and Chalcolithic periods (Croft, 1991).

Similarly to deer, pig also largely contributed to subsistence while cattle is absent as its husbandry was probably inefficient in the island (Knapp, 2013).

At the end of the Chalcolithic, hunting and consumption of deer decrease considerably (ca. 41%; Croft, 1991).

Animal exploitation changed during the Bronze Age with a decrease of deer hunting, an increase of caprine and a new investment on cattle breeding (Spigelman, 2006; Knapp, 2013).

On the Bronze Age site of Marki Alonia (in central Cyprus) animal resources are dominated by caprines, cattle and then deer (Croft, 2006).

Even if caprine remains are numerically more important, cattle should have supplied the main meat and milk resources (Croft, 2006).

On the site of Nitovikla caprines constitute >90% of the faunal remains (Spigelman, 2006).

The intensification of caprines exploitation goes with a diversification of animal use, i.e. for meat, milk and other secondary products according to the sites (Spigelman, 2006).

PARAGRAPH

Some Several archaeobotanical studies have been performed on different Prehistoric and Bronze Age sites in Cyprus (e.g. Colledge, 1989; Thiebault, 2003; Willcox, 2003; Lentini, 2009; Lucas, 2014).

These studies indicate the presence of cultivated C3 plant species from the Neolithic period onward, such as wheat, barley, oats and legumes.

For the Chalcolithic, the study conducted at Souskiou-Laona (Lucas, 2014) indicate the presence cultivated cereals (emmer wheat and hulled barley), fruit trees (fig in great quantity, pistachio and grape), and lentil (only one remain).

For the Early Bronze Age period, the work conducted on the site of Pyrgos-Mavroraki provides some data on plant species cultivated consisting of different kinds of wheat, barley and legumes, as well as on other species as olive, grape, and officinal plants (Lentini, 2009).

Legumes species are diversified, and we note the presence of beans (Vicia faba), chickpeas (Cicer arietinum), lentils (Lens culinaris), peas (Pisum sativum), and bitter vetch (Vicia ervilia) for example (Lentini, 2009).

SECTION

Materials and methods

PARAGRAPH

The archaeological materials include adult human bone and teeth and some contemporary animal remains from the Chalcolithic and Early Bronze Age sites mentioned above (Table 1).

Sampling was performed on each archaeological site as follows: one human bone fragment and one human tooth from Souskiou-Laona settlement (Souskiou-Laona Operation A), twelve human bone fragments and one human tooth from Souskiou-Laona cemetery (Souskiou-Laona Operation C), two human bone fragments and one human tooth from Kalavasos-Kokkinoya, two human bone fragments and one human tooth (from a context with multiple commingled burials, may derive either from a single individual, or two different individuals) from Psematismenos-Trelloukkas, and one human bone fragment as well as one human tooth from Karmi-Palealona.

The faunal remains (sheep/goat, pig, and deer) were sampled to characterize the isotopic signal range of known diet species (e.g. plant consumers), for each specific archaeological environment (e.g. Bösl et al., 2006; Goude and Fontugne, 2016).

This sampling includes two bone fragments and one tooth from Kissonerga-Mylouthkia, and one bone fragment and one tooth from Psematismenos-Trelloukkas.

In total, twenty three human and five animal samples were selected (bone, n = 21 and teeth, n = 7) to be further studied after visual examination at the relevant excavation field centres and at the Archaeological Sciences Laboratory of STARC at CyI.

We selected bone with a thick cortex (diaphysis of long bones) and roots of teeth, in order to get enough material for the collagen extraction.

Moreover, as archaeobotanical remains were not available for these sites, modern botanical materials was considered in our study (carob tree, pod and seed; n = 6); this botanical sample has been carried out on freely growing tree from Kissonerga, close to the archaeological site.

No information on possible modern manuring is available; however, modern manuring is normally recognizable due to very low δ15N of synthetic products (Kendall et al., 2007) which is not the case for our samples (Table 1).

Bone and teeth collagen were extracted following Longin's (1971) method, modified by Bocherens (1992) (see details in Goude, 2007).

δ13C and δ15N denote the ratio of the heavy isotope (13C, 15N) to the light isotope (12C, 14N) in a sample relative to international standards (IAEA), and are expressed in ‰.

Percentages of C and N and isotopic ratios are measured from 1.0 mg of freeze-dried collagen and analysed with EA-IRMS (Iso-Analytical Ltd., UK).

As a first step, the preservation of collagen is verified according to different criteria: collagen yield >10 mg/g (van Klinken, 1999; Dobberstein et al., 2009), carbon content >30 weight % (wt%) and nitrogen content greater or equal to 10 wt% (Ambrose, 1990) and C/N ratios between 2.9 and 3.6 (DeNiro, 1985).

Then, stable isotope (δ13C, δ15N) measurements are performed on human and animal bone collagen in order to evaluate protein intake (Ambrose and Norr, 1993).

This method provides individual dietary information on the last years of an individual's life for bone (Valentin, 2003) and on the period of growth for teeth (e.g. Beaumont et al., 2013).

Carbon stable isotope values give information on the environment exploited by individuals (e.g. marine versus terrestrial), and nitrogen stable isotope values provide information on animal protein consumption (e.g., herbivore, carnivore).

SECTION

Results and discussion

PARAGRAPH

Collagen was obtained from all the samples.

However, in most cases the quantity was very low and the extraction yield ranges from 1.2 mg/g to 127.3 mg/g (Table 1).

As a general feature (mean ± 1SD), we can see that teeth (32.9 m/g ± 42.6, n = 7) have a greater collagen yield than bones (8.5 ± 11.2, n = 21), and Bronze Age samples (36.5 mg/g ± 45.6, n = 7) have a greater yield than Neolithic/Chalcolithic samples (7.4 mg/g ± 9.1 mg/g).

Moreover, human samples have more collagen preserved than animal samples and samples located in Kyrenia region have greater yield than those from the other geological contexts.

In line with the preservation criteria described previously, only the samples with a yield ≥10 mg/g, i.e. nine samples out of 28, have been measured with an EA-IRMS.

From these nine samples, only four gave isotopic signals (Table 1).

Indeed, for the others the quantity of extracted collagen was too low to be correctly measured.

From these four samples, only three samples (NC_S_2, NC_S_9, NC_S_10) follow the preservation criteria described above (Table 1): one tooth and one bone fragment, both human and from the same site (Psematismenos-Trelloukkas, Early Bronze Age), and one tooth from an articulated human individual from another site (Souskiou-Laona Settlement, Chalcolithic).

Although the visual examination of the Psematismenos-Trelloukkas samples led us to suspect a very poor preservation, this site supplied materials preserved somewhat better, in terms of collagen, than on the other sites included in this study.

PARAGRAPH

Carbon stable isotope results of the samples meeting established preservation criteria range from −19.1‰ to −18.9‰ (n = 3), and nitrogen stable isotope from 7.6‰ to 11.0‰ (Table 1; Fig. 2).

Collagen extraction yield and elemental composition indicate a potential influence of archaeological parameters on the preservation of the bone/teeth collagen in Cyprus.

As our data set is relatively small, the following inferences should be viewed with caution, to be further verified by future research.

First, collagen yield could be linked to the sample's age.

In this study, Bronze Age samples seem to have more preserved collagen than the Neolithic/Chalcolithic ones.

Data from literature indicates that Neolithic Cypriot remains are extremely poorly preserved (only 18% of the samples studied by Lange-Badré and Le Mort, 1998 have acceptable C/N values).

On the other hand, Bronze Age human samples of Erimi Laonin Tou Parakou provide a better preservation compared to both Neolithic and Chalcolithic remains (64% of bone samples with acceptable C/N values; Sciré, 2017), supporting our assumption.

Secondly, geological location seems to could affect the preservation of collagen.

Non-parametric statistical tests show that sample yields from sites located in the west coast of Cyprus are lower than those from other sites(Kruskal Wallis test, p = 0.019).

Finally, burial mode could also have an impact on the remains decomposition and thus the preservation of the collagen.

Due to the likely (1) empty space decomposition of the body and (2) multiple burial opening and closing (allowing bone manipulation), as inferred from contextual burial data (Crewe et al., 2005; Lorentz, 2015, 2016), human remains could potentially be more exposed to diagenesis than ones buried in a single grave directly in sediment.

Our results would thus support the hypothesis of a better collagen preservation of osteological materials coming from primary burial, as already observed in other geographical contexts (Gerdau-Radonić et al., 2015).

PARAGRAPH

For all successful analysed human samples, carbon stable isotope variation is very low (0.2‰), unlike the nitrogen one (3.4‰).

Compared to the isotopic variability available in the literature, the range of both carbon and nitrogen stable isotope ratios led us to think that (1) these individuals exploited a preferentially C3 terrestrial environment for food resources, and (2) there is no regular marine protein input in the diet of these individuals (Goude et al. 2010).

However, the Bronze Age samples show high nitrogen stable isotope ratios (10.5 ± 0.7‰, n = 2) compared to the Chalcolithic one (7.6‰).

The bone and dental tissues analysed for these three samples were formed after the weaning period.

The formation of the root of the first upper premolar takes place between 7.5 and 14.5 years of age, and for the third mandible molar between 14 and 21 years of age (Liversidge, 2008; AlQahtani et al., 2010).

Contrary to teeth, bone is formed during the last years of individual life, due to a permanent tissue remodelling (Valentin, 2003).

Thus, if one accepts that the local environment shows the same isotopic pattern between the two periods, the high nitrogen value recorded for the Bronze Age samples could suggest a diet with (1) a possible consumption of more animal proteins, and/or proteins from high trophic level animals (e.g. freshwater resources, not weaned animals), compared to the Chalcolithic individual, or (2) a possible consumption of more legumes, and/or animals fed with legumes, by the Chalcolithic individual in comparison with the two Bronze age samples (Virginia and Delwiche, 1982).

Legumes are ubiquitous and widespread during the Bronze Age in the Near East, specifically lentil and pea (Riehl, 2008).

This was particularly noticed by Lösch et al. (2006), on a Neolithic site in Turkey, where most of the humans and some animals have low δ15N ratios, and was also supported by botanical remains.

In the case of Cyprus, carpological remains of legumes are regularly found at Prehistoric sites, and they seem to be commonly cultivated with wheat and barley (e.g. Colledge, 1989; Lentini, 2009).

Some δ13C data obtained on Neolithic lentils (Lens orientalis/culinaris) from archaeobotanical investigations on a site in Syria show seed values of −23.4‰ ± 0.9 (n = 14) (Araus et al., 1999), but archaeological δ15N are not available.

To further discuss this issue, modern legume data were acquired on different part of local carob tree samples (Table 1).

Data indicate low δ15N ratios, particularly for leaf and pod (parts of plant potentially consumed by animals; Fig. 2) which strengthens the hypothesis of a possible direct (plant) and/or indirect (animals fed with legumes) consumption of legumes by humans.

Be that as it may, a pertinent interpretation of human data, to reconstruct palaeodiet behaviour, needs a more particular isotopic baseline, specific to each site and period, more commonly provided by isotopic data from well-known faunal species assumed to have been consumed by humans (e.g. herbivorous/carnivorous species) (e.g., Goude and Fontugne, 2016) and cultivated plant remains; thus, the palaeodietary hypothesis proposed above should be carefully considered.

PARAGRAPH

In order to understand the place of these results in the prehistoric general scheme for the region, we compared our Cypriot stable isotope results with some data available in the literature for human and faunal remains dated to the Neolithic and Bronze Ages, located in the Eastern Mediterranean (Lange-Badré and Le Mort, 1998; Lösch et al., 2006; Papathanasiou, 2003; Richards et al., 2003; Triantaphyllou et al., 2008; Sciré, 2017; Fig. 2 and Table 2).

Some of these data show a large variation of stable isotope values, particularly for nitrogen, for humans as well as for domestic herbivores, as observed at Çatalhöyük (Neolithic, ca. 7600–5500 BCE, Turkey) within domestic herbivores (Table 2).

Bos sp. show very high δ15N values (9.4‰ ± 1.5, n = 10) compared to the caprines (6.8‰ ± 1.7, n = 3) reflecting probably specific herding practices (Richards et al., 2003) and consequently limiting its use to interpret the human values from Cyprus.

Although the collagen preservation of many Neolithic Cypriot samples from Khirokitia is not satisfactory, as demonstrated by the authors (Lange-Badré and Le Mort, 1998), it is interesting to note that our Chalcolithic and Bronze Age human samples have different isotopic ratios (Fig. 2).

Most of the Neolithic Cypriot materials highlight a modified amino acid profile (Lange-Badré and Le Mort, 1998), underlining the difficulty of using it as comparative remains for our data.

The Cypriot Chalcolithic sample has values similar to the ones recorded in Nevali Çori human collagen (Neolithic, ca. 8500–7500 BCE, Turkey) and in some Neolithic and Bronze Age individuals from Greece1 (ca. 6800–1150 BCE).

On the contrary, Cypriot Bronze Age samples have isotopic values closer to the Erimi Bronze Age individuals, the Çatalhöyük individuals and the average of the Neolithic Greek population (Fig. 2).

Though a wide range of isotopic values are pointed out in these studies, all of the authors indicate that the protein part of the diet of the last years of these humans' lives mainly come from terrestrial resources (meat/milk and plants) from a C3 environment, with variable animal protein intake according to individuals.

Indeed, whatever the location of the sites (close by/or not to the sea/freshwater resources), this dietary pattern, mainly based on terrestrial protein intake, is common amongst prehistoric populations in the region (e.g. Vika, 2009, 2015).

The significant use of marine foods by humans is not excluded in this region, but usually found in only few individuals (Greece, Neolithic, Papathanasiou, 2003); Crete, Middle Byzantine, (Bourbou and Richards, 2007).

Moreover, all domestic faunal remains from the Near East show wide variability in their stable isotope values for the Neolithic and Bronze Ages (Table 1).

If we consider the animal isotopic ratios of the compared sites mentioned and the variability of values recorded in these different environments, it is worth mentioning that the different δ15N observed between the Cypriot Chalcolithic and Bronze Age samples does not necessarily reflect a different access in terms of quantity of animal protein intake.

This hypothesis is also supported by the Bayesian models (FRUITS; Fernandes et al., 2014) we attempted (Fig. 3) to further evaluate the relative proportion of different food resources (data from Table 1) in the Prehistoric human diet.

Models support also the hypothesis of slight differences in legumes consumption between the Chalcolithic and Bronze Age individuals in Cyprus, as testified by botanical analysis in the Prehistoric Cypriot context (Lentini, 2009).

Our set of isotopic data is too small to testify diachronic modification in human food choices in Cyprus, however, it is worth to note that changes in agricultural practices and food preparation has been reported by archaeological data during Chalcolithic-Early Bronze Age, concomitant with broader contacts, as in Anatolia (Frankel and Webb, 2004; Knapp, 2013; Lucas, 2014).

It seems also possible that legumes could have been an important food resources for all the Prehistoric human groups in the Near-east compared in this study.

However, this observation must be considered with caution as the models do not include archaeobotanical samples and cereals species.

SECTION

Conclusions

PARAGRAPH

This pilot study presents as attempt to examine some collagen preservation criteria from Chalcolithic and Bronze Age human and animal bone and teeth, as well as the palaeodietary signals for different sites in Cyprus using stable isotope analysis which up to now have only been scarcely documented in Cyprus.

A very poor preservation of collagen, especially in bones, is highlighted, together with a degree of preservation which could be impacted by the sample's age and location.

The analysis of the few stable isotope data successfully obtained (3/28) within this study is consistent with a diet probably mainly based on terrestrial resources, as observed in other prehistoric populations from the region (Richards et al., 2003; Papathanasiou, 2003; Lösch et al., 2006; Triantaphyllou et al., 2008; Vika, 2009, 2015), and potentially including a significant part of legumes.

However, palaeodietary information should be considered with caution due to the very small sample size and the absence of local archaeozoological and archaeobotanical isotopic data.

This work provide new elements to better understand the potential of Chalcolithic and Bronze Age bone and dental remains for isotopic analysis and the feasibility of palaeodietary studies in Cyprus.

Considering these results, it seems that samples should be preferentially taken from (1) teeth, from (2) human and animal remains buried directly in sediment (excluding re-opened spaces) and (3) coming from sites located on sedimentary superficial formations derived from a calcareous substratum.

Further analyses should include thorough studies of environmental data, and additional faunal remains need to be analysed in order to discuss our results with more relevance.