10.1016/j.jhep.2019.06.029

ABSTRACT

TITLE

TLR9 signalling in HCV-associated atypical memory B cells triggers Th1 and rheumatoid factor autoantibody responses

PARAGRAPH

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection contributes to the development of autoimmune disorders such as cryoglobulinaemia vasculitis (CV).

However, it remains unclear why only some individuals with HCV develop HCV-associated CV (HCV-CV).

HCV-CV is characterized by the expansion of anergic CD19+CD27+CD21low/− atypical memory B cells (AtMs).

Herein, we report the mechanisms by which AtMs participate in HCV-associated autoimmunity.

PARAGRAPH

The phenotype and function of peripheral AtMs were studied by multicolour flow cytometry and co-culture assays with effector T cells and regulatory T cells in 20 patients with HCV-CV, 10 chronically HCV-infected patients without CV and 8 healthy donors.

We performed gene expression profile analysis of AtMs stimulated or not by TLR9.

Immunoglobulin gene repertoire and antibody reactivity profiles of AtM-expressing IgM antibodies were analysed following single B cell FACS sorting and expression-cloning of monoclonal antibodies.

PARAGRAPH

The Tbet+CD11c+CD27+CD21− AtM population is expanded in patients with HCV-CV compared to HCV controls without CV.

TLR9 activation of AtMs induces a specific transcriptional signature centred on TNFα overexpression, and an enhanced secretion of TNFα and rheumatoid factor-type IgMs in patients with HCV-CV.

AtMs stimulated through TLR9 promote type 1 effector T cell activation and reduce the proliferation of CD4+CD25hiCD127−/lowFoxP3+ regulatory T cells.

AtM expansions display intraclonal diversity with immunoglobulin features of antigen-driven maturation.

AtM-derived IgM monoclonal antibodies do not react against ubiquitous autoantigens or HCV antigens including NS3 and E2 proteins.

Rather, AtM-derived antibodies possess rheumatoid factor activity and target unique epitopes on the human IgG-Fc region.

PARAGRAPH

Our data strongly suggest a central role for TLR9 activation of AtMs in driving HCV-CV autoimmunity through rheumatoid factor production and type 1 T cell responses.

