10.1016/j.jasrep.2018.04.002

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Revisiting the date of the Java Sea Shipwreck from Indonesia

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

The Java Sea Shipwreck was recovered in Indonesia in 1996 (Fig. 1).

The ship was a trading vessel thought to have been sailing from Quanzhou in southern China to Indonesia, possibly Tuban on the island of Java (Flecker, 2003).

The timing of this voyage has been debated; an issue that we address here.

In this article, we use several new lines of evidence to argue that the Java Sea Shipwreck vessel may have sailed almost a century before previously thought (Flecker, 2003), possibly as early as 1162 CE.

The diverse suite of data we consider includes comparative ceramic finds from land and underwater wreck sites, new radiocarbon dates, and inscriptions on ceramic pieces.

PARAGRAPH

The vessel that would become the Java Sea Shipwreck was part of a long and dynamic tradition of maritime trade in Southeast Asian waters (see Christie, 1998; Hall, 2011; Manguin, 2004; Wheatley, 1961).

The main cargo of the vessel consisted of Chinese ceramics and cast iron.

The ship also carried a number of fine-paste-ware kendis thought to be from southern Thailand, resin, elephant tusks, and an assortment of artifacts in lesser quantities that probably belonged to the crew or passengers on board.

Based on ceramic styles, Brown (1997) estimated the date of the wreck to be the mid- to late 13th century.

In 1997, as part of the initial research program by Pacific Sea Resources, the company that undertook the final recovery of the wreck, a single sample of resin from the wreck site was sent for standard radiocarbon dating (Flecker, 1997a; Mathers and Flecker, 1997, Appendix H).

It was concluded that the dates from the radiometric analysis supported a mid- to late-13th-century assignment, which would correspond to the beginning of the Yuan dynasty (c. 1271 CE) in China and, on Java, the fall of the Singasari kingdom and the rise of the Majapahit Empire.

PARAGRAPH

In 1998–1999, half of the cargo, more than 7500 pieces, was donated to the Field Museum of Natural History in Chicago; per Pacific Sea Resources' licensing agreement, the other half was given to the Indonesian government (Flecker, 2011).

In 2014–2015, Niziolek and Kimura had a number of correspondences with ceramic experts in China and Japan, and some of them questioned the initial mid- to late-13th-century date for the wreck.

Certain ceramics were deemed more similar to those produced in the 12th and even 11th century in China and ones found at wreck sites dating to that period (e.g., the Breaker Shoal and Huaguangjiao I wrecks).

In order to assess more accurately the date of the Java Sea Shipwreck, we submitted additional samples for radiocarbon dating using accelerated mass spectrometry (AMS), a more precise method than standard radiometric dating.

SECTION

Dating Asian shipwrecks

PARAGRAPH

The challenge of dating shipwreck sites is compounded by the credibility of underwater operations in many parts of Asia.

Some recovery efforts are conducted not for the pursuit of academic research but for commercial benefit through the sale of salvaged artifacts.

Under the latter circumstance, rigorous dating has been less frequently practiced, and there are almost no serious arguments on the construction dates and operational time periods of the ships.

In many instances, neither relative nor absolute dating methods have been employed to assess the relationship of the hulls of the shipwrecks and their cargos (but see Blake and Flecker, 1994; Flecker, 2015; Kimura, 2010).

PARAGRAPH

Chinese ceramics are the materials used most frequently to date shipwrecks found in Asian waters (Edwards McKinnon, 1977; Guy, 1986).

Experts largely rely on the types and styles of these pieces to assign them to a particular time period, especially for ceramics produced prior to the Ming dynasty (1368–1644 CE) when reign marks began to be used.

Dynastic assignments, however, are not precise and can be greatly refined using additional dating methods.

Although a few shipwrecks have antiques in their cargos, including coins (e.g., Flecker, 2000; Flecker, 2001) and ceramics (Keith, 1980), it seems unlikely that the ceramics from the Java Sea Shipwreck would fall into this category.

The sheer quantity of pieces being transported (an estimated 100,000 [Flecker, 2005–2006], which would have been expensive for merchants to store for long) and the fact that similar ceramics are found at archaeological sites from this time period throughout Southeast Asia counters the idea of them being much older than the actual date of the wreck.

PARAGRAPH

If found at the site, coins also can indicate the earliest date a vessel sailed.

Inscriptions, too, can be used to determine when cargo items were produced and loaded onto a ship.

When available, organic materials can undergo radiocarbon dating to provide additional evidence of timing.

A comprehensive approach for dating based on the relative and absolute dates of multiple artifacts and materials is regarded as the preferred approach.

We provide an overview of dating methods used for some of the 9th–14th-century shipwrecks found in East and Southeast Asian waters in Table 1.

Different methods and distinct researchers can produce alternative dates for the same shipwreck, a situation to be remedied through careful consideration of all available data.

PARAGRAPH

The Field Museum has custody of donated material from the Java Sea Shipwreck and, as a higher educational and research institute, is in the position to implement rigorous scientific study on the salvaged materials.

In 2014, a research mission commenced to re-examine the date of the shipwreck primarily presented in the salvage company's report (Mathers and Flecker, 1997) and other sources (e.g., Flecker, 2009).

Standard radiometric dating and ceramic classification were used to initially date the Java Sea Shipwreck to the late Southern Song to early Yuan dynasty.

No coins were reportedly recovered at the wreck site by Pacific Sea Resources.

Another source of data for dating would be the ship's structure (e.g., Manguin, 1993).

Based on his research, Flecker (2003, 2005–2006) notes that the vessel was made of wood from a tropical climate and of Southeast Asian construction instead of hybrid construction, which would have been evidence of a much later date.

Below we use new radiocarbon dates and inscriptions found on ceramic vessels to suggest that the vessel probably sailed earlier than the mid- to late 13th century.

SECTION

Initial radiocarbon dating of the Java Sea Shipwreck

PARAGRAPH

During the initial examination of the ceramics found at the wreck site, Brown and Miksic used ceramic styles to date the Java Sea Shipwreck to the mid-13th century (Flecker, 1997a).

To test this hypothesis, Pacific Sea Resources sent a single resin sample to Beta Analytic, Inc., for 14C and 13C/12C analyses (Flecker, 1997a).

Although a few small pieces of wood were recovered from the wreck site, Flecker notes that old timber might be used in a ship's construction so may not be the best choice for dating: ‘[r]esin, on the other hand, is unlikely to have been kept in storage for any significant period before being shipped and the sample has suffered minimal degradation’ (1997a: 76).

The results of the radiometric dating are presented in Appendix H of the archaeological report (Mathers and Flecker, 1997) and are summarized here in Table 2.

PARAGRAPH

Based on these results, along with the assessment of the ceramic styles, Flecker (1997a) contends that the wreck probably does not date earlier than the 13th century.

He (Flecker, 1997a: 76) goes on to note, however, that this ‘is significant, as several of the finer wares did suggest an earlier date.’

The comparison with similar archaeological finds affirms that this earlier date should not be discounted.

The Sarawak Museum holds a couple of ceramic pieces dated to the 10th–12th centuries in its collections that are similar to ones found at the wreck site (see Chin, 1988: Plates 9 and 14).

In addition, a ewer from a tomb in China dated to 1173 shares some striking similarities with those from the cargo (see Addis, 1978: 27).

As mentioned previously, based on their knowledge of recent kiln and shipwreck excavations, several of our colleagues thought that some of the ceramics may date to the 12th or even 11th century.

This, along with the earlier date of 11th or 12th century for shipwrecks with similar ceramic cargos (see Table 1), prompted us to submit samples of resin and elephant tusk from the Java Sea Shipwreck for additional radiocarbon dating, this time using accelerated mass spectrometry (AMS), which is more precise and requires smaller sample sizes than radiometric dating—attractive for working with museum collections when conservation is a concern.

SECTION

Materials and methods

PARAGRAPH

Three samples of organic material, one ivory and two resin, were chosen for dating (Table 3).

A total of 16 pieces of elephant tusks (Fig. 2) were recovered in the southeast part of the wreck site, which Flecker believes corresponds with the starboard side of the stern of the ship (Flecker, 1997b; Mathers and Flecker, 1997: Appendix C).

All of the pieces had suffered a high degree of weathering and exfoliation after deposition, and a number of studies have demonstrated that ivory can undergo physical and chemical alterations when exposed to a marine environment (Albéric et al., 2014; Doménech-Carbó et al., 2016; Godfrey et al., 2002).

Flecker (1997a) was aware of these issues and chose not to submit ivory for the initial radiocarbon dating.

During sample selection, our team chose two fragments from the interior portion of the tusk (catalog no. 351825), which would not have been as exposed to taphonomic processes as material from the exterior.

A sample weighing 1.29 g was sent to DirectAMS in Bothell, Washington, in May 2015 for AMS dating.

Unfortunately, and not surprisingly, these pieces had undergone changes and no collagen was present; however, DirectAMS was able to process the sample as they would calcined bone, which lacks organic material as well.

To further reduce levels of possible contamination (e.g., the adsorption of extraneous carbon), DirectAMS removed about 5 to 15% of the surface of the sample.

PARAGRAPH

Two samples of resin from a single block (catalog no. 351444) also were sent for analysis—one to DirectAMS and one to Beta Analytic, Inc., in Miami, Florida.

(Beta Analytic is where Pacific Sea Resources submitted their sample of resin for the initial dating of the wreck using radiometric methods [Flecker, 1997a; Mathers and Flecker, 1997: Appendix H].)

The majority of the eight blocks of resin (Fig. 3) were found in the same area as the elephant tusks, but they were more spread out, probably the result of their low specific gravity (Flecker, 1997b; Mathers and Flecker, 1997: Appendix C).

Like the tusks, the resin displayed a lot of exfoliation at the surface; however, below the corky cortex that had developed over the centuries under water lay glassy, brown dammar resin (Lambert et al., 2017), which still emits a faint, sweet aroma.

Our team worked with Field Museum conservator Jonathan P. Brown to carefully remove as much of the degraded cortex as possible from the area to be sampled and then gently scraped small chunks of glassy material off of the resin block using a stainless steel scalpel blade.

This material was weighed and then sent for analysis.

DirectAMS received a sample weighing 370 mg and Beta Analytic's sample weighed 360 mg.

As per standard laboratory procedures, each sample sent to Beta Analytic and DirectAMS underwent AMS-standard delivery analysis with a pretreatment of acid washes.

(See http://www.radiocarbon.com/ and http://www.directams.net/.)

PARAGRAPH

After results from the laboratories were received, the CALIB Radiocarbon Calibration program by M. Stuiver and P. J. Reimer was used to determine calibrated results.

SHCAL13 (for material from the southern hemisphere) and INTCAL13 (for material from the northern hemisphere) software were both used to generate calibrated dates (Hogg et al., 2013; Reimer et al., 2013; also see Talma and Vogel, 1993).

Both sets are reported here.

The origins of the elephant tusks and resin are still uncertain and they could have come from the northern or southern hemisphere.

From the 11th to 13th centuries, elephant tusks came from what are now parts of mainland and island Southeast Asia, southern India, and East Africa (see Miksic, 1997).

The resin on board the ship initially was thought to have come from Southeast Asia, probably Sumatra (Flecker, 2003; Miksic, 1997); however, nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) analysis recently conducted on a number of resin samples has generated spectra that closely match samples from Gujarat, India, and Mizunami, Gifu Prefecture, Japan (Lambert et al., 2017).

Although the shipwreck resins do not have a clear match to resin samples available from Southeast Asia, Indonesia cannot yet be entirely ruled out as a source (Lambert et al., 2017).

SECTION

Results and discussion

PARAGRAPH

Results obtained from the new radiocarbon dating analyses are considerably earlier than the initial dates obtained by Pacific Sea Resources.

New calibrated dates range from 889 cal CE to 1261, with the majority of them falling during the 11th and 12th centuries (Table 4).

Only one set of new dates overlaps with the initial mid-to-late-13th-century radiocarbon date.

One of the calibrations for JSWResin_02 results in a date range of 1048 cal CE to 1261 (95.4% probability).

The new dates could be used to suggest a significantly earlier date for the Java Sea Shipwreck, sometimes by as much as four centuries; that is, if the radiocarbon dates alone are used.

PARAGRAPH

One piece of evidence that is critical to dating is an inscription found on the bases of two ceramic boxes from the wreck (Fig. 4).

The inscription appears as molded Chinese characters, which have been transcribed as 建宁府大铜峰汪承务宅印(?)

(Jianning Fu Datongfeng Wang Chengwu zhai yin(?)).

Importantly, a potential place of production is indicated—Jianning Fu in Fujian Province.

In The Gazetteer of Jianning Prefecture from 1541, Jianning Fu is identified as a Song dynasty prefecture located in the northern part of Fujian Province.

This area was named Jianning Fu (建宁府) in 1162 during the Southern Song dynasty, fu designating a superior prefecture.

In 1278, during the formation of the Yuan dynasty, the administrative status of Jianning Fu changed.

Under Kublai Khan, it became Jianning Lu (建宁路), lu being a larger unit of several prefectures.

(See Xia and Wang, 1964, 2009.)

Based on the Jianning Fu inscription, the ship could not have sailed prior to 1162, but it could have sailed shortly after that, until 1278 or slightly later.

A mid- to late 12th-century date partially overlaps with the calibrated dates for radiocarbon sample JSWResin_02 (Fig. 5).

PARAGRAPH

Another part of the cargo we analyzed for dating information are storage jars, 80 of which were recovered (Brown, 1997) (Fig. 6).

Two jars bear date stamps that are associated with the Chinese Stem-and-Branch calendar system.

This system, which originated in China thousands of years ago, is made of 60-year cycles determined by the ten Heavenly Stems and 12 Earthly Branches.

One mark partially reads 丙子 (bing zi) and the other, 丙辰 (bing chen) (see images in Brown, 1997: 170).

The dates of the bing zi stamp that fall close to 1162–1278 are 1156 (which, even though it is earlier than 1162, is plausible if an old jar was reused and shipped), 1216, and 1276.

Those of the bing chen stamp are 1136, 1196, and 1256.

Unfortunately, these dates do not do much to narrow the date range provided using the Jianning Fu inscription, 1162 to 1278 (Fig. 5).

PARAGRAPH

How can the earlier dates resulting from more recent AMS dating be explained?

When selecting material from the Java Sea Shipwreck for the initial radiocarbon dating, Flecker (1997a) chose not to use ivory because it may have exchanged 14C with seawater, seeming older than it actually was.

Although the earliest dates for the ivory selected by Niziolek and Kimura might predate the shipwreck by more than two centuries, the later dates fall relatively close to the earliest year the ship might have sailed, 1162 (see Table 4).

The resin samples we submitted for analysis support an earlier date for the shipwreck, too.

One of the resin samples (JSWResin_01) was dated to before 1162.

The other sample, JSWResin_02, when calibrated using SHCAL13 has date ranges falling during the time period of the Jianning Fu inscription; when INTCAL13 is used for calibration, this sample's date ranges are earlier (Fig. 5).

Similarly, Wilson and Flecker (2010: 36) noted that the resin from the Belitung Wreck submitted for radiocarbon dating seemed ‘substantially older’ than the star anise and timber that was analyzed.

Based on recent research to determine the plant from which the Java Sea Wreck resin was derived and its sources, it appears that the outer cortex of the resin underwent changes mimicking maturation (Lambert et al., 2017).

Perhaps this is what affected the dating of the Belitung resin as well as that from the Java Sea Shipwreck.

Despite attempts to use only the glassy, inner portion of the resin in sampling, it is possible that some of the cortex was included.

In both instances, it is also possible that the resin being shipped was from old pieces that were collected from the forest floor rather than recently harvested, as suggested by Wilson and Flecker (2010).

This could certainly be the case for the Java Sea Shipwreck resin (JSWResin_01) given the dates using the SHCAL13 calibration, however, it is less probable for the dates generated using INTCAL13, which predate the wreck by more than 150 years (see Table 4).

This is an area requiring further research since resin and elephant tusks were major natural trade items that can be dated using radiocarbon dating.

SECTION

Conclusions

PARAGRAPH

Based on updated visual assessments of ceramic materials, the Jianning Fu inscription, and the suite of radiocarbon dates, it is very possible that the Java Sea Shipwreck vessel sailed almost 100 years earlier than initially thought, dating to the earlier part of the Southern Song dynasty (1127–1279 CE)—the heyday of export ceramic production in China—instead of during the transition from the Southern Song to Yuan dynasty.

This was a time when the Chinese court encouraged private traders from China to travel abroad instead of relying on trade obtained through the tributary system.

An earlier date range also would mean that the ship sailed closer to the fall of Srivijaya, one of Southeast Asia's greatest maritime empires, when other coastal polities, including the Kediri kingdom on Java, were competing for economic and political power.

PARAGRAPH

In addition, given this new data, we will have to re-evaluate the port where the ship was loaded and the vessel's linkage with other major port cities along China's central and southern coasts.

The new results also may point the interpretation of the destination of the Java Sea ship in a new direction.

It is now believed that further scholarly study of the cargo will lead to additional new perspectives.

PARAGRAPH

Furthermore, this research demonstrates the importance of intensive reanalysis of past salvaged material from Asian shipwrecks using rigorous scientific approaches and newly expanded comparative resources.

Unfortunately, many shipwreck cargos recovered from Southeast Asian waters have been dispersed and traces of them have been completely lost.

The Java Sea Shipwreck collection at The Field Museum is one of the few, substantial wreck cargos available for study at a research institute.