10.1016/j.jhep.2019.03.021

ABSTRACT

TITLE

Liver-directed gene therapy results in long-term correction of progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis type 3 in mice

PARAGRAPH

Progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis type 3 (PFIC3), for which there are limited therapeutic options, often leads to end-stage liver disease before adulthood due to impaired ABCB4-dependent phospholipid transport to bile.

Using adeno-associated virus serotype 8 (AAV8)-mediated gene therapy, we aimed to restore the phospholipid content in bile to levels that prevent liver damage, thereby enabling stable hepatic ABCB4 expression and long-term correction of the phenotype in a murine model of PFIC3.

PARAGRAPH

Ten-week-old Abcb4−/− mice received a single dose of AAV8-hABCB4 (n = 10) or AAV8-GFP (n = 7) under control of a liver specific promoter via tail vein injection.

Animals were sacrificed either 10 or 26 weeks after vector administration to assess transgene persistence, after being challenged with a 0.1% cholate diet for 2 weeks.

Periodic evaluation of plasma cholestatic markers was performed and bile duct cannulation enabled analysis of biliary phospholipids.

Liver fibrosis and the Ki67 proliferation index were assessed by immunohistochemistry.

PARAGRAPH

Stable transgene expression was achieved in all animals that received AAV8-hABCB4 up to 26 weeks after administration.

AAV8-hABCB4 expression restored biliary phospholipid excretion, increasing the phospholipid and cholesterol content in bile to levels that ameliorate liver damage.

This resulted in normalization of the plasma cholestatic markers, alkaline phosphatase and bilirubin.

In addition, AAV8-hABCB4 prevented progressive liver fibrosis and reduced hepatocyte proliferation for the duration of the study.

PARAGRAPH

Liver-directed gene therapy provides stable hepatic ABCB4 expression and long-term correction of the phenotype in a murine model of PFIC3.

Translational studies that verify the clinical feasibility of this approach are warranted.

