10.1016/j.jasrep.2018.10.006

FULLTEXT

TITLE

XRF and LA-ICP-MS studies of gold and silver artefacts from a 12–13th century CE tumulus in Senegal: Implications for the medieval African gold trade

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Gold is among the most legendary export commodities of the African continent.

Probably first evoked by Herodotus' 6th century BCE account of ‘silent’ bartering for gold by Carthaginians somewhere along the Atlantic coast, the myths of abundance and easy acquisition of this metal from inner Africa never ceased to exist.

There is still much scholarly debate about the true antiquity, scale and impact of that trade (e.g., Devisse, 1972; Cahen, 1979; Garrard, 1982; Devisse, 1993; Nixon et al., 2011).

Archaeology has had thus far relatively little to contribute to the debate.

On the one hand, this is a result of the still comparatively low number and range of archaeological studies specifically devoted to investigate the exploitation, processing and trade of precious metals in the continent.

On the other, gold and silver surprisingly appear to be late additions to the material canon of African, but especially West African, cultural expressions.

In contrast to Eurasia, where gold was already in use by the mid- to late 5th millennium BCE (e.g., at the Bulgarian sites of Durankulak and Varna, see Krauß et al., 2014; Leusch et al., 2015), none of the archaeological gold or silver finds yet known from West Africa stems from a context older than the 8th century CE, and the majority is indeed considerably younger (Table 1).

PARAGRAPH

To date, most of the West African archaeological evidence of gold and silver come from some few burial mounds in Senegal (Rao-Nguigelah and Massar: Joire, 1955; Ndalane: Thilmans and Descamps, 1972) and Nigeria (Durbi Takusheyi: Gronenborn et al., 2012), or from urban sites linked with the early Arab-Islamic trans-Saharan trade in Mauretania and Mali: Tegdaoust, the putative archaeological site of Awdaghost (Robert and Devisse, 1970), Djenné Jeno (McIntosh, 1995), and Essouk-Tadmekka (Nixon, 2017) (Fig. 1).

It is not surprising that around the same time when gold was demonstrably in use at the latter places, early Islamic scholars first mention this part of Africa as particularly rich in gold – such as Al-Fazari, writing in the 8th century CE, and Al-Yaqubi in the late 9th c. CE (Levtzion and Hopkins, 1981).

At their time and in the subsequent centuries, the kingdom of Ghana and the nearby mythical island of Wangara became famous for the sheer abundance and alleged high purity of the gold found there.

Gold, at latest from then on, became one of the main factors of the thriving trans-Saharan trade, given its vital importance in the economy of the Islamized regions of the continent.

Gold ore deposits are indeed found in West Africa; particularly the gold-rich regions of Buré and Bambuk at the upper Senegal/Falemmé and Niger rivers, the greater Volta region, as well as the Sirba and other tributaries to the Niger River at the Eastern Niger Bend (Fig. 1) have been seen as likely sources of the gold found at the above mentioned sites and traded to North Africa in medieval times.

Those regions are part of the West African craton with its extended Birrimian formation and other greenstone belts, bearing most of the gold found in West Africa.

Gold from those deposits, particularly if panned from rivers and streams, is rather free of impurities and can reach Au-contents of >97 wt% (Gondonneau et al., 2001; Magnavita and Magnavita, 2018).

This certainly reminds us of the purity of West African gold as praised by medieval medieval Arab authors such as Al-Bakri (Levtzion and Hopkins, 1981: 69), who stated in the 11th c. CE that “[t]he gold of Awdaghust is better and purer than that of any other people on earth”.

The only other metal commonly found as an impurity in West African placer gold is silver, though usually in quantities of only a few percent.

Given the rarity of native silver or silver-rich ores in West Africa, it is indeed highly likely that silver found in the West African archaeological record was produced elsewhere (Joire, 1955; Herbert, 1984; Benhsain and Devisse, 2000).

PARAGRAPH

Despite the particular significance of gold and, to a much lesser extent, silver in the economic history of medieval West and North Africa, there has been relatively little archaeological research specifically designed to understand the “life history” of those metals, from the ore sources they were gained to the finished products into which they were transformed.

Though some efforts have been made as to trace the origins of the metal used to mint North African gold and silver coins (e.g., Guerra et al., 1999; Roux and Guerra, 2000), to characterize the chemical composition of some West African precious metal objects (Bourhis, 1983; Gondonneau et al., 2001; Guerra, 2000; Roux and Guerra, 2000) and, more recently, to determine the manner by which gold was processed in Saharan West Africa (Nixon et al., 2011; Rehren and Nixon, 2014), the number of analysed samples is still far too small as to account for the probable complexity of the medieval African trade in precious metals.

The present paper makes a small but significant contribution to this question.

Beyond slightly increasing the number of chemical compositional data for West African archaeological gold and silver artefacts, the results of the study are significant in a particular research aspect.

Especially concerning the analysed gold objects, the now available data hint at a yet little known facet of the African gold trade.

In the following pages, we present that data and discuss the implications of the study in the context of yet available West and North African findings.

SECTION

Materials and methods

SECTION

Materials

PARAGRAPH

The analysed artefacts derive from a burial mound in West-Central Senegal, in a region where some of the largest and most impressive monuments of this type exist.

Known from Nigeria in the east to Senegal in the west, only very few West African tumuli have been investigated archaeologically so far, making it difficult to grasp both the full time range of this burial tradition and the cultural and socio-political contexts of its practice.

The few dated tumuli mainly belong to the 8th to 15th centuries CE (Table 1).

Historical text sources on this type of burial monument exist as well; the earliest reference is the 11th century account by the Arab geographer Al-Bakri, who described the funerary ceremony for a ruler of the gold-rich Ghana Empire in detail, including the construction of a large earthen mound above the lavishly appointed burial.

Also for other regions, it can be currently assumed that monumental burials of this sort were often erected for rather eminent members of their communities, as underlined by the presence of high-status symbols in form of elaborate weapons, exotic and precious jewellery (e.g., El Oualadji, Desplagnes, 1951; Rao-Nguigelah and Massar, Joire, 1955; Durbi Takusheyi, Gronenborn, 2011, Gronenborn et al., 2012).

PARAGRAPH

The artefacts of the present study belong to the central inhumation that was exposed by excavations at a medium-sized tumulus (45 m in diameter and 3.5 m high) near the village Kael (Mbacké, Senegal) (Magnavita and Thiaw, 2015; Magnavita, 2017).

An individual in his/her 40s, equipped with decorated weapons and wearing three precious metal objects, was found buried alongside six other, young adults.

The latter were bare of any preserved grave goods and possibly forced to follow the first one into death (Magnavita, 2017), a practice known as “morts d'accompagnement” among pre-colonial historians and anthropologists of the wider region (see, e.g., Gallay, 2010; Cros et al., 2013).

The context of the burials was recently AMS-dated by means of wood charcoal fragments1 recovered from close to the skeletons (Magnavita, 2017), with results ranging from the 11th to 13th century CE (790 ± 30 BP, Beta-353906; 900 ± 30 BP, Beta-411755).

The younger of the two dates falls into the late 12th to late 13th century (cal.

1190–1279 CE, 2-sigma), thus ascertaining the probable time the monument was constructed.

PARAGRAPH

The precious metal objects in the grave consist of two bracelets found in situ as worn together on the right wrist of the deceased, as well as a tubular object – possibly a large solitary bead – at the neck.

The latter is biconical and about 11.2 cm long, tapering from 15.7 mm at its centre to 9.7 mm at the ends (S. Patscher, RGZM, pers.

comm.) (Fig. 2).

It is made of golden sheet metal of between 0.35 and 0.7 mm thickness, bent longitudinally to form a narrow joint.

The bracelets have an inner diameter of about 6 cm and are stylistically nearly identical, the only difference being the colour of the metal, one being silvery, the other golden (Fig. 3).

Both are made of a massive rod of metal, each showing one flattened and one curved side.

The two bracelets were found lying with their flat sides turned toward each other; a light stain on the curvy exterior revealed during conservation work at the Römisch-Germanisches Zentralmuseum Mainz (RGZM) supports the assumption that the bracelets were once fixed to each other with a clip of organic material (pers.

comm. S. Patscher, RGZM), giving the impression of just one, bi-metallic bracelet.

PARAGRAPH

We report here on the compositional analyses of those three precious metal artefacts.

The analyses were carried out in Mainz (Germany) at the laboratories of the RGZM and the Institute for Geosciences at Johannes Gutenberg University of Mainz (JGU).

SECTION

Methods

PARAGRAPH

Minimally invasive or even completely non-destructive analytical methods are usually required when archaeological precious metal objects are concerned.

Several different methods not leaving any or only very minimal traces on the object are available but their sensitivity and accuracy differ, especially when trace elements or isotopes are concerned (Guerra and Calligaro, 2004).

While this is not an issue for questions related to the general composition of an alloy, low detection limits at the trace- and ultra-trace element level are often paramount for studies related to the provenance of precious metals.

This said, in order to not quit the minimal- or non-invasive strategy, analyses have to be run in situ, i.e. directly on the surface of objects.

Since surface corrosion and contamination may affect the results of quantitative elemental analyses significantly, it is a balancing act to minimize both the invasiveness and surface effects.

In addition, however banal it might seem, the demand for keeping objects intact only allows choosing technical apparatuses with a sufficiently large probe chamber.

In the light of these considerations, a combination of the completely non-destructive micro X-ray fluorescence analysis (μ-XRFA) was employed for determining the major element composition of the alloy of the Kael artefacts, followed by the minimally invasive laser ablation inductively-coupled plasma mass spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS) method for “fingerprinting” the metals by quantitatively determining a larger number of minor and trace elements, including Platinum Group elements (PGE).

PARAGRAPH

Prior to analysis in the course of conservation work at the RGZM, the surface of each object was freed from corrosion products and dust.

The corroded surface of the silver bracelet was mechanically abraded in order to reveal the original, blank metal surface.

The two gold objects were cleansed with distilled water and their surfaces carefully rubbed with ethanol-soaked cotton wool (S. Patscher, RGZM, pers.

comm.).

These pre-treatments were undertaken in order to minimize the effects of surface corrosion and potential external adhesions on the objects, since these might lead to anomalous analytical results.

PARAGRAPH

The μ-XRFA was carried out by S. Hartmann (RGZM) in order to determine the amount of major and minor elements Au, Ag, Cu, Pb in the artefacts.

For this purpose, an Eagle III X-ray spectrometer (Roentgenanalytik Systeme GmbH & Co.

Kg, Taunusstein), equipped with a rhodium-tube (Oxford Instruments) working at max.

40 kV (1 mA) and an EDAX-analytical nitrogen-cooled Si(Li)-detector with an energy resolution of 148 eV for MnKα was used (S. Hartmann, pers.

comm.).

On each object, three focal spots of 0.3 mm in diameter were excited by X-rays under atmospheric air with an excitation energy of 40 kV (300 μA).

The so-generated X-ray fluorescence was measured for 300 s (conformation time 35 μs, Ti-25 filter), respectively.

Gold alloy reference materials RAuP6 and silver alloy RAgP7 (Rand Refinery, South Africa) were used as calibration materials.

Element concentrations were quantified by coupling the fundamental parameter method with standard-based calibration (S. Hartmann, pers.

comm.).

PARAGRAPH

Further element concentrations were subsequently determined at the Institute for Geosciences, JGU using an Agilent 7500ce ICP-MS instrument coupled to an ESI NWR193 ArF excimer laser ablation (LA) system equipped with a TwoVol2 ablation cell.

The ArF LA system was operated at a pulse repetition rate of 10 Hz and an energy density of c. 3 J/cm2.

On each of the two bracelets 15 spots and on the golden tube 10 spots with a diameter of 50 μm were analysed performing background measurement for 15 s, ablation times of 30 s and wash out times of 20 s. Ablation was carried out under a He atmosphere and the sample gas was mixed with Ar before entering the plasma.

We used the multi-element synthetic glass NIST SRM 610 for calibration of the element concentrations applying the preferred values reported in the GeoReM database (http://georem.mpch-mainz.gwdg.de) (Jochum et al., 2005, 2011) as the “true” concentrations to calculate the element concentrations of the samples.

Additionally, we analysed gold alloy RAuP6 and silver alloy RAgP7 reference material as quality control materials (QCMs) to monitor accuracy of the measurements and calibration strategy.

However, we are aware that RAuP6 and RAgP7 are reference materials for XRF and might not be homogeneous on μm-scale.

Therefore, deviations from the certified values and low precision can be expected for those materials.

Signals were recorded in time-resolved mode and processed using Glitter 4.4.1 (Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia; Griffin et al., 2008).

The following isotopes were monitored: 197Au, 49Ti, 53Cr, 55Mn, 56Fe, 59Co, 60Ni, 63Cu, 67Zn, 69Ga, 75As, 77Se, 103Rh, 105Pd, 111Cd, 119Sn, 121Sb, 128Te, 139La, 140Ce, 141Pr, 146Nd, 147Sm, 153Eu, 157Gd, 163Dy, 165Ho, 166Er, 178Hf, 189Os, 195Pt, 208Pb and 209Bi.

109Ag was used as internal standard applying for the samples the Ag contents previously determined by μ-XRF and the preferred values reported in the GeoReM data base for the QCMs.

Resulting element concentrations for the samples and QCMs together with reference values are given in Tables 2 and 3, respectively.

SECTION

Results and discussion

PARAGRAPH

The elemental analyses of the three objects show that all are made of polymetallic alloys.

Of the two golden artefacts, the tube has the highest Au content (88.7 wt%), with mainly silver and copper contributing to the rest of the composition (Table 3).

The amount of copper in the alloy is relatively high (0.9 wt% Cu), though still within the range of natural gold (up to c. 1 wt%, see e.g., Hartmann, 1982).

The notable presence of tin (c. 0.19 wt% Sn) and iron (0.25 wt% Fe) could point to an alluvial origin of the gold; however, alluvial placer gold is generally more depleted in copper (e.g., Schmiderer, 2008).

We therefore cannot exclude that the elevated amounts of both Cu and Sn result from the alloying with bronze – either as a deliberate addition, or through recycling of metals that contained bronze.

If this were the case, we can only speculate about how much Cu and Sn had been present in the natural gold before alloying, and how much got potentially added.

In this regard it is worth noting that the total Sn:Cu ratio is about 1:5, tantamount to a tin-bronze with about 20 wt% Sn.

Due to the possibility that base metals were deliberately added, we deduce that a number of trace elements may have come along as impurities.

The pattern of the trace elements found which are common impurities in copper or copper-tin alloys (e.g., As, Pb, Zn), can therefore not be unequivocally used for sourcing the original gold component.

Indeed, the concentration of the latter trace elements are all rather elevated, with Zn and Pb reaching together >1000 μg/g (Table 3).

In view of these considerations, only the PGE (i.e., Rh, Ru, Pd, Pt, Os and Ir) can be regarded as characteristic trace elements of the natural gold in the alloy.

The LA-ICP-MS analysis showed that of the latter, only Pd and Pt are above detection limits (Table 3B).

PARAGRAPH

Just as the gold tube, the golden bracelet is made of a polymetallic alloy, though with a considerably higher portion of both Ag and Cu.

The high Cu content of >3 wt% is particularly remarkable, as it is indicative of an artificial alloy.

Moreover, the elevated amount of Pb (c. 475 μg/g) points to another addition, namely that of silver from an argentiferous lead ore.

In this regard, it is interesting to note that the Pb/Ag ratio is quasi equal in both gold artefacts.

What concerns the PGE, Pd and Pt are better represented than in the gold tube (>9 μg/g, respectively), particularly in view of the bracelet's lower Au content.

PARAGRAPH

Also the silver-based bracelet is an artificial alloy.

Apart from Ag (c. 84.3 wt%) as main component, there are notable levels of Au, Cu, and Pb (see Table 3A).

When compared to the two gold objects, a strong positive correlation becomes apparent between Cu, Ag and Pb (Fig. 4), indicating that these metals were added at once.

Impurities possibly deriving from the lead-silver and copper additions are represented by elevated amounts of Bi, Sm, Zn and As (Table 3B).

PARAGRAPH

The surprisingly high amount of Au (c. 9.4 wt%) certainly requires an explanation.

Although natural auriferous silver deposits have been described as existing elsewhere in Africa, notably Egypt (Gale and Stos-Gale, 1981, but see Rehren et al., 1996), the elevated values of Pb (0.6 wt%) and Bi (c. 860 μg/g) point to the use of silver extracted by cupellation from argentiferous lead ore.

In oxidized lead ores, such as cerussite (PbCO3), the gold content can be much higher than in primary ones (Craddock, 2014).

However, for a concentration of Au as high as in the silver bracelet, we must also consider the possibility that mixed, recycled metal was used, part of which contained gold.

It should be noted that the relative proportion of Pd and Pt to the Au content is slightly higher than in the two gold objects.

SECTION

Comparison with other West and North African data

PARAGRAPH

One of the key questions regarding the silver and gold objects from Kael is whence the employed raw metals, or at least the finished products, originate.

Tracing the origin of the gold in the Kael objects is admittedly difficult, given that their chemical compositions point to the deliberate modification of the metals used.

The trace element pattern of the natural gold –its “fingerprint” – is thus potentially blurred, though, as will be seen, some information can be still drawn from the PGEs in the alloys.

In order to find out more about the potential origin of the Kael alloys, we briefly compare their composition with that of other West and North African precious metal artefacts or production remains.

So far, quantitative elemental analyses down to the trace elemental level have been carried out on only very few West African precious metal artefacts (see Table 1).

Although small and not of statistical relevance, data comparison with the results of those analyses allow gaining some important initial clues to the handling of gold and silver in medieval West Africa, as outlined below.

SECTION

Silver

PARAGRAPH

The Kael silver bracelet is to date the only archaeological object from West Africa for which fully quantitative elemental data including a larger number of trace elements are available (Table 4).

All other West African analyses are either not fully quantitative or only report on few elements, making thorough comparisons with the Kael data difficult.

While this presently at least hinders attempts to understand the circulation of silver within West Africa, the use of the comparatively larger and more detailed database for North African silver coins (dirhems) proved to be informative (Table 4; Fig. 5).

PARAGRAPH

Among the West African silver-based artefacts that were qualitatively or semi-quantitatively examined are several from Senegalese sites.

Among those, higher levels of gold as present in the Kael silver bracelet were only reported for two fragments of circular metal applications found at the late first to early second millennium CE site of Sintiou Bara at the Middle Senegal River (see Fig. 1).

The latter consist of quaternary alloys of Ag, Cu, Au and Pb (Bourhis, 1983; Garenne-Marot, 1993), just as in the case of the composition of the Kael silver bracelet.

Since also a brass-silver alloy ingot and secondary metal production waste of the same type were found at that site, it has been argued that imported alloys were processed at Sintiou Bara and perhaps other sites in the wider region.

Beyond those, silver-copper as well as brass-silver alloys were among the jewellery from the burial mounds of 11th–14th century CE Massar at the lower Senegal River (Joire, 1955; Bourhis, 1983; Garenne-Marot, 1993).

Given the apparent stylistic and technical similarities of these and other jewellery both from the Massar and Rao sites with those of the Western Maghreb and Spain, it has been argued that either metalworkers from North Africa were active in the wider region (for which there is however no conclusive evidence) or that finished objects were being imported into Senegal at that time (Joire, 1955; Garenne-Marot, 1993).

PARAGRAPH

However, a central question related to all those silver artefacts is where the raw metal used to produce them ultimately originates.

It is well known that Cu was a common addition in the production of Islamic North African and Spanish silver coins and that the majority of the silver used in their coinage derived from argentiferous lead ores (Roux and Guerra, 2000).

This is indeed well consistent with the silver alloys both from Kael and at least some of the other West African artefacts, a finding that a priori may indicate a common source of the alloyed metal used both north and south of the Sahara.

Along with the stylistic and technical evidence above mentioned, it seems indeed likely that the Senegalese silver objects are ultimately imports from North Africa.

As can be seen in Fig. 5, the Kael results are well in line with those from Islamic North Africa and Spain.

Potentially, lead isotope analysis could be a useful method to determine the origin of the Kael and other West African silver artefacts more precisely.

In fact, such a test was recently done at a silver dirham from Essouk-Tadmekka in Mali, showing that the most probable source of the lead-silver used lays somewhere in the Western Maghreb or Morocco (Fenn et al., 2017).

In the case of the Kael and some of the other Senegalese silver artefacts mentioned, however, the fact that several of these seem to be mixtures of different, perhaps recycled metals certainly restricts the informative value of such analyses.

SECTION

Gold

PARAGRAPH

When the composition of the two Kael gold objects is compared to that of other West African archaeological gold samples (Gao, Tegdaoust and Essouk-Tadmekka), it becomes apparent that the latter have significantly higher gold contents (>93 wt%) (Table 5).

In fact, the only other important component in the gold of those locations is Ag (<6.5 wt%).

The chemical composition of those samples thus strongly suggests that they are all from natural Au-Ag alloys, given that the low amounts of Cu (<0.3 wt%) and Pb (<240 μg/g) do not point to the deliberate addition of other metals.

PARAGRAPH

Particularly revealing is the concentration of PGEs in the metals, as those elements are characteristic of the natural gold used.

Guerra (2005) studied the trace element pattern of modern gold nuggets from various West African regions and emphasized a general depletion in PGEs, with an almost absence of Pd and Pt, as characteristic of West African gold.

The gold in the wires from Tegdaoust as well as in the Gao bead shows this virtual absence of both Pd and Pt (Table 5; Fig. 6); coupled with their overall high purity, this makes it likely that regionally available West African gold was indeed used for manufacturing the objects from both Tegdaoust and Gao.

Interestingly, Guerra (2002) also identified the use of the same type of gold for the minting of Islamic North African gold coins, particularly those issued under Almoravid rule at the mint of Sijilmasa (11th–12th c. CE) (Fig. 6).

Given that Sijilmasa was an important terminus of the Islamic trans-Saharan trade, the logical assumption is that the North African Almoravids used primarily West African gold for their coinage.

Remarkably, however, neither the gold found in the coin moulds from Essouk in Mali (see Table 5) nor that of the Kael alloys match the West African native gold as characterized through trace elements by Guerra and colleagues.

This raises the yet unanswered question as from where the raw gold both from Essouk and Kael ultimately originates.

At least presently, the current state of research does not allow identifying the deposits where that gold came from, so that, theoretically, sources in the Sahara, North Africa and even Europe should be taken into account.

PARAGRAPH

Whilst the question around the ultimate origin of Kael's raw gold remains open, after all the bulk chemical composition of the alloyed metal might give a hint of their place of manufacture.

In this context, while the Essouk gold seemingly underwent a refinement process (Rehren and Nixon, 2014) resulting in an almost pure product (>98 wt% Au), the opposite can be seen in case of the two Kael gold objects, where the addition of baser metals rather led to a reduction in the gold content.

The alloyed nature of Kael's gold is indeed particularly intriguing, since one would rather expect to come across pure gold objects in a country where, according to historical sources, that metal was more abundant than salt.

Major implication of all this is in fact the notion that, alongside the silver bracelet, also Kael's gold artefacts were produced outside West Africa or at least out of a metal mélange manufactured elsewhere.

PARAGRAPH

Just as in the case of the Senegalese silver objects, the Islamic Maghreb instantly comes to mind as the possible source of Kael's gold artefacts.

Whilst, as already mentioned, the majority of Almoravid gold coins issued at the mint of Sijilmasa shares the characteristics of native West African gold, coins with other compositions were similarly circulating in the Islamic Maghreb by then.

Surprisingly or not, some of these are consistent with the composition of the Kael gold alloys.

In particular, Almoravid dinars minted at Aghmat, c. 300 km west of Sijilmasa, as well as dinars issued by the Almoravids and Taifas in southern Spain, share both the general alloy characteristics as well as the diagnostic trace elements of the Kael artefacts (Fig. 7, Table 5).

In this respect, there are presently good reasons to suggest that, in the 12th–13th century, Islamic North Africa and Spain were alloying silver and gold, minting coins and possibly even producing gold jewellery that, to a thus far unknown extent, were also being carried south into West Africa.

Whilst preliminary, the Kaelfindings are of great significance in two related historical aspects.

First, they imply that there was in medieval West Africa a demand for jewellery not made out of the pure native West African gold but of alloyed precious metal.

Second and more important, they provide the first verifiable material confirmation for the existence of a largely neglected southward traffic of gold and/or gold items into West Africa, thus defying the current notion of a unidirectional export of the metal toward North Africa.

Currently, we can only speculate about the reasons of such traffic.

Beyond primary economic interests of professional traders and travellers, it is at least plausible supposing that other forms of exchange and social interactions - such as gifts, tributes or even booty - might also have contributed to the occurrence of North African gold and silver jewellery in the region.

Beyond their economic implications, the Kael artefacts also raise questions on the political and social dimensions and meanings the finds may have had on a regional and local scale.

These and other problems will be thoroughly discussed within the scope of a planned cultural anthropology oriented paper by the first author.

SECTION

Summary and conclusions

PARAGRAPH

The results of the compositional analyses of the Kael artefacts are surprising, in that, contrary to our expectations, they do not explicitly reveal the use of the legendary West African gold, said to have been “better and purer than that of any other people on earth” (Al-Bakri in Levtzion and Hopkins, 1981: 69).

Instead, the analyses showed the Kael artefacts to be alloys, what raises questions about the origin both of the raw gold and the alloyed metal used.

At least based on the concentration of PGEs in the objects, it can be presently maintained that the Kael raw gold probably does not stem from West Africa, making sources in the Sahara, North Africa or even Europe possible candidates.

Regarding the origin of the alloyed metal of which the artefacts were made, a comparison with published compositional data of West and North African artefacts similarly indicate a northern source.

In fact, the chemical composition of the Kael gold artefacts convincingly match alloyed metal used to mint gold coins and, supposedly, also to manufacture jewellery in Western Morocco and southern Spain between 11th and 13th centuries CE.

By then, these regions were under Almoravid and Almohad rule and given that the Almoravid empire extended as far south as the Niger and Senegal rivers, it seems very likely that precious metals circulating in the north were also being carried south into West Africa.

While such a traffic has been never questioned for silver, the current study demonstrates a hitherto undocumented facet of the West African trade in gold: It implies that, in addition to the well-known massive export of West African gold to North Africa, at times also gold along with silver went in the opposite direction.

Whilst the first of its kind, the present evidence for a southward traffic in gold may not be an isolated case.

At least from the period of Almoravid rule over parts of West Africa we may indeed expect that a part of yet not excavated archaeological gold artefacts in the region has a non-West African origin.

In order to validate this suggestion, quantify the scale of such a traffic and ultimately expand the analytical database of African archaeological gold, there is an urgent need for archaeological studies tackling African precious metal artefacts.