10.1016/j.jhep.2019.06.018

ABSTRACT

TITLE

ALDH2 deficiency promotes alcohol-associated liver cancer by activating oncogenic pathways via oxidized DNA-enriched extracellular vesicles

PARAGRAPH

Excessive alcohol consumption is one of the major causes of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).

Approximately 30–40% of the Asian population are deficient for aldehyde dehydrogenase 2 (ALDH2), a key enzyme that detoxifies the ethanol metabolite acetaldehyde.

However, how ALDH2 deficiency affects alcohol-related HCC remains unclear.

PARAGRAPH

ALDH2 polymorphisms were studied in 646 patients with viral hepatitis B (HBV) infection, who did or did not drink alcohol.

A new model of HCC induced by chronic carbon tetrachloride (CCl4) and alcohol administration was developed and studied in 3 lines of Aldh2-deficient mice: including Aldh2 global knockout (KO) mice, Aldh2*1/*2 knock-in mutant mice, and liver-specific Aldh2 KO mice.

PARAGRAPH

We demonstrated that ALDH2 deficiency was not associated with liver disease progression but was associated with an increased risk of HCC development in cirrhotic patients with HBV who consumed excessive alcohol.

The mechanisms underlying HCC development associated with cirrhosis and alcohol consumption were studied in Aldh2-deficient mice.

We found that all 3 lines of Aldh2-deficient mice were more susceptible to CCl4 plus alcohol-associated liver fibrosis and HCC development.

Furthermore, our results from in vivo and in vitro mechanistic studies revealed that after CCl4 plus ethanol exposure, Aldh2-deficient hepatocytes produced a large amount of harmful oxidized mitochondrial DNA via extracellular vesicles, which were then transferred into neighboring HCC cells and together with acetaldehyde activated multiple oncogenic pathways (JNK, STAT3, BCL-2, and TAZ), thereby promoting HCC.

PARAGRAPH

ALDH2 deficiency is associated with an increased risk of alcohol-related HCC development from fibrosis in patients and in mice.

Mechanistic studies reveal a novel mechanism that Aldh2-deficient hepatocytes promote alcohol-associated HCC by transferring harmful oxidized mitochondrial DNA-enriched extracellular vesicles into HCC and subsequently activating multiple oncogenic pathways in HCC.

