10.1016/j.jasrep.2018.11.005

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Application of XRD and digital optical microscopy to investigate lapidary technologies in Pre-Pottery Neolithic societies

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Stone beads are ubiquitous objects of material culture present in settlement and mortuary deposits that hold information on symbolic systems and participation in exchange networks.

As personal adornment items, beads accrue social and symbolic meaning and are used by individuals to express group affiliation, reify social roles and status, and exchange cultural capital (Dubin, 2009; Jones, 2004; Lankton, 2003).

In addition to signaling qualities associated with the use of beads as ornamentation, the series of technological and stylistic choices with bead manufacture are determined by both the physical properties of the raw material as well as cultural traditions, symbolic practices, and social networks (Lechtman, 1977; Lechtman, 1999; Hosler, 1994).

PARAGRAPH

In the Near East, stone beads were a form of personal expression from the end of the tenth through the seventh millennium cal.

BC during the Pre-Pottery Neolithic when sedentary communities first experimented with food production and new forms of symbolic expression.

The increased use of beads, whether made of stone, shell, bone, or wood, during the Pre-Pottery Neolithic may have reflected the emergence of novel symbolic systems and signaling behaviors that developed in order to deal with new and unfamiliar forms of social organization (Verhoeven, 2002; Wright, 2009).

Increasingly elaborated concepts of identity or metaphorical thinking (Mithen et al., 2005; Twiss, 2007; Wright, 2009) or the rise of prestige technology (Bains, 2012) may have been crucial for signaling participation in these new social roles.

PARAGRAPH

In the southern Levant, stone beads appear to have first come into use during the Late Natufian (11500 to 10750 cal.

BC; Bar-Yosef Mayer and Porat, 2008).

The Natufians, semi-sedentary hunter-gatherers who lived in well-constructed settlements often containing buildings constructed of stone, fashioned beads out of stone with a preference for green colored raw materials and used these beads, as well as shell beads, as objects of personal ornamentation (Bar-Yosef Mayer, 2008; Bar-Yosef, 1999).

Green beads made out of stone continued to rise to prominence during the Pre-Pottery Neolithic A (ca. 9700 to 8500 cal.

BC) when semi-sedentary communities began experimentation with plant cultivation (Bar-Yosef Mayer and Porat, 2008; Wright and Garrard, 2003).

Green minerals used to make these beads were sourced from a variety of locations some distance from the settlements in which they were used, suggesting that extended social or trade networks were in place at the time.

Less is known about bead use later during the Late PPNB (7250 to 6700 cal.

BC) when domesticated sheep and goats were husbanded and settlements increased dramatically in size and occupation density (Kuijt and Goring-Morris, 2002; Makarewicz, 2013)

PARAGRAPH

Despite the ubiquity of bead use in Pre-Pottery Neolithic communities, surprisingly little is known about their manufacture.

The decisions made in the production of beads, as non-utilitarian objects, have the potential to inform broader cultural priorities.

Here, we document stone bead making during this dynamic period of subsistence and social transformations in order to document commonalities and differences in the manipulation of materials that were ultimately imbued with symbolic significance.

By establishing first the physical limitations of the raw material selected for bead manufacture, it is possible to draw out choices that were guided by cultural traditions.

Based on this premise, we explore bead manufacture at el-Hemmeh, a Pre-Pottery Neolithic settlement located in the Wadi Hasa, Jordan, using a materials science approach that includes X-ray diffraction (XRD) and 3D digital optical microscopy.

Specifically, we investigate the changes occurring in mineral bead ornamentation at the Pre-Pottery Neolithic site of el-Hemmeh, Jordan, including style, color, material choice, and manufacture.

The overarching goal of the study is to determine the patterns of flow of not just materials but ideas throughout the Levant, which may reflect cultural shifts and ideological trends associated with the spread of agriculture.

SECTION

Materials and methods

SECTION

The bead assemblage from el-Hemmeh, Jordan

PARAGRAPH

el-Hemmeh is a Pre-Pottery Neolithic settlement located in the Wadi el-Hasa, Jordan yielding deposits dating to both the Late PPNA (ca. 8800 to 8300 cal.

BC; Finlayson and Makarewicz, 2017) and Late PPNB (7250 to 6700 cal.

BC; Makarewicz et al., 2006; Fig. 1).

These dynamic periods of cultural and subsistence change were characterized by nascent plant cultivation and community-oriented forms of social organization during the PPNA and intensive wheat and barley agriculture, herding of domesticated sheep and goats, and increasingly household-oriented social structures during the LPPNB (Finlayson and Makarewicz, 2017).

PARAGRAPH

The PPNA settlement at el-Hemmeh consists of numerous free-standing and semi-subterranean circular, semi-circular, and irregular structures constructed of stone and pisé (Makarewicz, 2014; Makarewicz and Rose, 2011).

The spaces in between buildings served as informal dumping areas for construction debris, hearth sweep-outs, food, and other waste from lithic, groundstone, and bead manufacture (Makarewicz, 2014).

Subsistence strategies pursued at the settlement included pre-domestication cultivation of barley and gathering of wild plants (White and Makarewicz, 2012), as well as hunting of a variety of terrestrial and avian taxa including goat, gazelle, aurochs, boar, terrestrial and some aquatic game birds.

The LPPNB settlement, which lies directly over a portion of the PPNA occupation layers, consists of agglutantive, free-standing, two-story stone architecture (Makarewicz et al., 2006; Makarewicz and Austin, 2006).

Domesticated sheep and goat herding as well as wheat and barley agriculture formed the basis of the subsistence pursued at the settlement (Makarewicz, 2013; White and Wolff, 2012).

PARAGRAPH

Both occupations yielded diverse assemblages of personal ornamentation including stone beads, perforated bone pendants and beads, and shells sourced from both the Red Sea and the Mediterranean Sea.

During the 2010–2014 excavation seasons, 70 finished stone beads and 91 pieces of raw material were recovered from secondary midden and hearth sweep-out deposits from the PPNA settlement (see Fig. 2; SI Appendix B).

During the 2004–2007 excavation seasons, 70 finished stone beads and 19 pieces of raw material were recovered from LPPNB middens (see Fig. 3; SI Appendix C).

Pieces of unworked stone excavated from deposits at the site containing other objects of material culture were classified as raw material.

All of these stone beads and raw material samples were included in general typological characterization and color analysis.

Of these, the mineral composition of 27 PPNA stone beads, 11 PPNA raw material samples, and 7 LPPNB stone beads were determined via XRD, representing the different categories of minerals based on visual inspection.

Ten stone beads from the PPNA assemblage, all featured in Fig. 2, were further selected for in-depth analysis via digital optical microscopy.

These ten objects were chosen as case studies on the basis of representing the range of colors, shapes, and sizes of beads in the assemblage.

SECTION

Analytical methods used in the study of stone beads and raw materials

SECTION

Typology and color classification

PARAGRAPH

We used the typology and terminology used by Wright and Garrard (2003) as a starting point to describe bead morphology.

Their categories were modified and expanded, drawing on the nomenclature of Beck (1973) to reflect the bead shapes found at el-Hemmeh (Fig. 4, Table 1).

Categories added include the rhomboid as a subtype with oval, round and teardrop pendant, and the ball shape.

An additional new category of rectangular beads was added, including subtypes with either one or two perforations.

This rectangular type is of particular importance in the PPNA.

Bead typologies present in other comparable assemblages but absent at el-Hemmeh include beveled disc beads and triangular, trapezoidal, oval, and rectangular pendants.

PARAGRAPH

Type 1 beads are circular in cross-section, and have a diameter longer than the thickness of the bead.

Type 1 includes two sub-types, the disc (Type 1a) and the wheel (Type 1b).

In cases where the diameter of the perforation is greater than one-third the diameter of the bead, the object is classified as a disc (Fig. 4, 1a).

If the diameter of the perforation is less than one third the diameter of the bead, the bead is a wheel (Fig. 4, 1b).

PARAGRAPH

Type 2 is rectangular in shape, with either one (Type 2a) or two (Type 2b) perforations.

A bead is classified as rectangular if its overall shape is box-like and it lacks circular or elliptical cross-sections.

Objects similar to the Type 2b rectangular double-perforation bead have been previously classified as either “double-holed pendants” (Bar-Yosef Mayer and Porat, 2008) or “flat oval beads” (Quinn, 2006).

However, with the rectangular beads in the el-Hemmeh assemblage the width of the object measured along the axis of perforation is not the shortest dimension, as is the case for a pendant, and so this nomenclature is considered to be inappropriate.

PARAGRAPH

Type 3 includes beads that are oval in shape, with subtypes that differ depending on the orientation of the perforation axis.

The bead is classified as oval (Type 3a) if the bead is flat and the perforation is oriented perpendicular to the plane of the oval (Fig. 4, 3a).

A rhomboid shape (Type 3b) is one where the perforation is oriented along one of the diameters of the oval shape (Fig. 4, 3b).

The length of the object measured parallel to the axis of perforation is equal to or less than the width of the bead.

PARAGRAPH

Type 4 beads are cylindrical, and posess lengths, measured along the axis of perforation, that are longer than the surface diameter.

Type 4 subtype assignments depend on the ratio of the perforation diameter to the diameter of the entire bead.

Cylindrical beads (Type 4a) exhibit a perforation diameter less than one third the diameter of the bead (Fig. 4, 4a), like the wheel beads (Type 1b).

Tubular beads (Type 4b) display a perforation diameter greater than one third of the diameter of the bead (Fig. 4, 4b), like disk beads (Type 1b).

PARAGRAPH

Type 5 consists of four different subtypes of barrel bead.

The barrel type, also referred to as “date-shaped” (Beck, 1973), exhibits rounded ends that differentiate them from the cylindrical and tubular types.

The barrel subtypes also differ in regards to their cross-sectional shape.

The circular barrel shape (Type 5a) has a round cross-section (Figs. 4, 5a; 3e; 3f), and the elliptical barrel (Type 5b) shape exhibits an oval cross-section (Fig. 4, 5b).

The walls of the tapered barrel (Type 5c) have a shape similar to the elliptical barrel but the edges come to a point (Figs. 4, 5c; 3h).

Lastly, the faceted barrel (Type 5d) has any number of planar faces (Figs. 4, 5d; 2h).

PARAGRAPH

Type 6 is the pendant category, with subtypes for teardrop (Type 6a; Figs. 4, 6a; 2f), round (Figs. 4, 6b; 3j; 3i), or a shape that is irregular or otherwise indeterminate (Type 6c; Figs. 4, 6c; 3k).

The smallest dimension of a pendant is the width, measured parallel to the axis of perforation.

Type 7 are ball-shaped beads that are spherical (Figs. 4, 7; 2b), and Type 8 consists of worked stone that cannot be classified into any of the other types due to being too fragmented or irregular.

PARAGRAPH

Bead color was recorded according to the Munsell color system, which details three dimensions of hue, value, and chroma.

Hue refers to color, Munsell value refers to lightness of color, and chroma refers to the color saturation.

All color determinations were carried out by the same person under a mix of overhead fluorescent lights and raking ambient sunlight from a window.

PARAGRAPH

The color categories used in this study are: Yellow, Green, Blue, Purple, Red, Brown and Gray.

Some include two closely related Munsell hues in order to narrow the total number of categories.

The Yellow category includes yellow (Y) and green-yellow (GY) hues.

Green includes green (G) and blue-green (BG) hues.

Blue includes the hues of blue (B) and purple-blue (PB).

There were no objects classified as purple (P).

The Red category includes only the red (R) hue.

The yellow-red (YR) hue is referred to as the Brown category and the neutral (N) hue is called Gray, using commonly recognizable color names.

SECTION

Determining mineral composition with XRD

PARAGRAPH

X-ray diffraction (XRD) has been increasingly used in both art and archaeology as a nondestructive technique that isolates materials such as pigments, coins, and glass (Schreiner et al., 2004; Lang and Middleton, 2005).

XRD entails the direction of a beam of x-rays targeted on the sample which are then bent and reflected in a unique pattern that permits determination of the sample crystalline structure and, through comparison of the diffraction pattern against a library of reference data, its mineral composition.

Establishing the provenance of minerals used in ancient material culture can also be ascertained by comparing diffraction patterns against those obtained from spatially defined mineral deposits.

Through inventory of the absence or presence of specific minerals in cultural artifacts in reference to located natural mineral deposits, it is possible to draw out ancient trade and exchange networks.

PARAGRAPH

XRD analyses were carried out on a Bruker D8 with GADDS Area Detector, a micro-diffraction instrument mounted with a 0.5 mm diameter collimater.

A flat graphite monochromator was used in continuous scan mode, collecting four frames at a step time of 180 s per frame.

The sample detector distance was set at 160 mm with a 2Theta of 25 and an Omega of 12.5, and the data was collected on a Vantex 2000 area detector using BRUKER-binary V4.

Three samples were also analyzed on a Rigaku High-Power Rotating Anode X-Ray Powder Diffractometer.

Pilot data reduction software was used, employing a partial Debye-Scherrer ring and reducing the data from 2D to 1D by azimuthal (radial) averaging.

Highscore Plus was used for qualitative phase identification, and to compare the spectrum produced by each sample with a library of reference standards.

In doing so, the mineral composition of objects was identified.

SECTION

3D digital optical microscopy

PARAGRAPH

A select group of beads were chosen for in-depth documentation of production methods using 3D digital optical microscopy.

Previous research investigating bead perforation technique typically relied on silicone dental mold material to obtain an impression of the interior walls of the perforation, which forms a negative of the shape profile of the perforation and any tool marks along the wall.

The mold would then be viewed using Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) in order to image the features on the mold (Gwinnett and Gorelick, 1979, 1993; Kenoyer and Vidale, 1992; Li et al., 2014; Groman-Yaroslavski and Bar-Yosef Mayer, 2015).

However, this method is not viable for samples that are too soft or unstable to withstand the molding process.

Many of the greenstone beads from el-Hemmeh were not hard enough to form a high quality, detailed impression out of silicone.

Additionally, the negative impression does not necessarily capture traces of fine tool working with high fidelity and potentially misses crucial information if the perforation changes width and becomes thicker near the interior of the bead.

PARAGRAPH

Each of the case study objects was analyzed via optical microscopy with a Hirox KH-8700 3D Digital Microscope using either a MX(G)-2016Z low-range high-performance zoom lens [20×–160×] with an attached diffusing adaptor, or a MX(G)-10C high resolution coaxial vertical lighting zoom lens with an OL-350II objective lens [350×–3500×].

Each object was mounted on a XY-GE-US Auto XY stage that is digitally controlled by a CT-X4-US remote drive system.

Photomicrographs are multi-focus images taken through a range of focal planes and assembled seamlessly by the Hirox proprietary software.

This allows for the capture of detailed images not possible with standard optical microscopy since the digital merging of images from different focal planes results in a depth of field much higher than can be achieved in one image alone.

It is therefore possible to produce one continuous image of the entire interior of a bead's perforation.

Two-dimensional measuring tools, capable of measuring distances to a resolution of 1 μm, were used to determine the diameters of perforations and widths of tool marks.

Three-dimensional tools include creating and manipulating a model of the object and mapping the height of the surface of the object as a function of vertical or horizontal position.

Such maps provide a quantifiable measure of the roughness or smoothness of the surface, the frequency of tool marks, and even cross-sections of tool marks.

To the best of our knowledge, this is the first application of this microscopic method to the study of archaeological artifacts, and the first non-destructive, non-contact technique that allows for the analysis of the perforation walls of beads.

SECTION

Results

SECTION

Typological variation increases and rectangular beads disappear during the LPPNB

PARAGRAPH

Disc and wheel (Type 1) beads were the most common bead shape encountered (ca. 63%) in the PPNA assemblage followed by rectangular (Type 2) beads (13%) (Fig. 5a; SI Table 1).

While disc and wheel beads remained the most common bead type identified in the LPPNB assemblage, they decreased in relative importance (Fig. 5b).

Notably, rectangular beads are completely absent in the LPPNB assemblage, while Barrels (Type 5) and pendants (Type 6) more than triple in frequency.

Overall, the LPPNB assemblage exhibits more variation in bead shape in the LPPNB compared to the PPNA, despite the lack of rectangular beads (Type 2).

SECTION

Pronounced shifts in bead color from the PPNA to the LPPNB

PARAGRAPH

Beads in the el-Hemmeh assemblage are brown, yellow, green, red, and gray in color.

Brown colored beads are the most commonly encountered beads in both the PPNA and LPPNB assemblages (Fig. 6; SI Table 1).

However, the color brown declines in importance, comprising 59% of all PPNA beads in comparison to only 40% in the LPPNB (Fig. 6).

The PPNA assemblage also yielded a high frequency of green beads (ca. 30%) followed by a moderate number of yellow beads (Fig. 6a).

There are no red beads in the PPNA bead assemblage.

However, red is the second most common color encountered in the LPPNB assemblage (30%) after brown while green is the least common (Fig. 6b).

PARAGRAPH

The Munsell value, or lightness of bead color is consistent between time periods.

The average Munsell value of finished beads from the PPNA is 6.45 and 6.42 for the LPPNB (SI Table A.1).

Minerals worked into beads during the PPNA are disproportionately skewed towards less saturated colors, compared to the selection of raw minerals at the site.

PPNA raw stone material assemblage exhibits more vibrant colors, with an average chroma of 2.97, than the set of worked beads from the PPNA, which only have an average chroma of 2.29 (SI Table A.2).

Additionally, there is a shift in chroma in the LPPNB, which average 2.43, towards materials that are more vibrant in color.

PARAGRAPH

Combining the analysis of typology and color, the increased variety in the LPPNB bead assemblage is even more apparent (Fig. 7).

PPNA beads are primarily brown disc and wheel (Type 1) beads, and the second largest category is green rectangular (SI Table A.3).

Several of the typologies are only or primarily represented by green beads (Fig. 7a).

In the LPPNB assemblage, brown discs remain the largest category but decline in frequency, and red discs are the second most common category (SI Table A.4).

There is more variety in the LPPNB, with red and brown colors appearing in almost all of the type categories (Fig. 7b).

SECTION

High mineral diversity during the PPNA despite a restricted palette

PARAGRAPH

Overall, the PPNA stone bead and raw material assemblage exhibits a higher diversity in mineral composition relative to the LPPNB assemblage (Table 2).

During both the PPNA and LPPNB, stone beads and raw materials that are gray or brown in color are composed of calcite, quartz, gypsum, or a combination of these minerals (see SI Tables A.7, Appendices B and C for attributes of all stone bead and raw material objects analyzed in this study).

PARAGRAPH

Some green minerals in both the PPNA and LPPNB assemblages are composed of either calcite or dolomite mixed with either fluorapatite or hydroxylapatite.

These minerals are marbles exhibiting a green color due to trace transition metal impurities, and may all have been sourced from the same outcrop.

However, there are additional green minerals represented in the PPNA stone bead assemblage that were not detected in the LPPNB bead assemblage.

These include copper- or aluminum-containing minerals like variscite, chrysocolla, and malachite.

The PPNA raw material assemblage includes an even wider range of green minerals not present in the form of finished objects, including albite, amazonite, atacamite, barite, brochantite, and olivine.

PARAGRAPH

Red minerals used for bead manufacture during the LPPNB but not present in the PPNA bead assemblage included calcite, dolomite, quartz, and hematite.

Several of these beads were made from marble of the same approximate composition of the green beads from both time periods, but differed in color due to the trace transition metals present.

SECTION

Reconstructing the steps of PPNA bead production

PARAGRAPH

Ten PPNA stone beads were selected for additional analyses in order to better characterize bead manufacturing techniques (Fig. 2; SI Table A.5).

As preliminary analysis indicated on-site production of beads during the PPNA, the beads selected for close study were drawn from the PPNA assemblage to gain an insight into production methods at el-Hemmeh.

Evidence for on-site production includes unfinished beads and an abundance of raw material recovered from cultural deposits.

The unfinished beads include one that is polished but un-perforated, one that is partially perforated, and many that appear to have been broken while undergoing perforation.

No such unfinished beads exist in the LPPNB assemblage at el-Hemmeh.

The major findings of each of the ten closely examined beads are presented here; a more detailed presentation of the results of these ten beads is reported in Raad (2015).

PARAGRAPH

A small, brown wheel bead (Fig. 2a), representative of the brown disc and wheel beads that dominate the PPNA assemblage, was determined via XRD to be composed of a mixture of calcite and quartz.

The bead perforation is approximately one millimeter in diameter and is not a perfect circle.

The shape of the perforation can be modeled with two overlapping circles of nearly identical diameters of 0.984 mm and 1.008 mm (Fig. 8).

One circle exhibits tapering on the front of the bead, while the other circle is tapered on the back.

This suggests that a tool was used to perforate the object from each side.

Bead thicknesses vary from 0.7 to 0.9 mm, and a tool with a tip width of approximately 1 mm was used to bidirectionally perforate this bead.

PARAGRAPH

A pale orange disc bead (Fig. 2i) was identified as calcite by XRD.

The interior wall of the perforation features distinct stepping, or ridging (Fig. 9a).

The bead's overall diameter is 5.2 mm, the diameter of the perforation at the surface of the bead is 3.1 mm, and the perforation tapers to a minimum diameter of 2.6 mm (Fig. 9b).

There is less distinctive beveling on the opposite side of the bead, the perforation of which has a surface diameter of 2.8 mm.

This greater widening on one side points to bidirectional perforation, emphasized on one side.

PARAGRAPH

A green disc bead composed of malachite (Fig. 2j) exhibits a perforation opening modeled by two slightly offset circles on either side of the bead (Fig. 10).

These could correlate to entry and exit points for two perforation events, one from either side, that were misaligned.

PARAGRAPH

A green rectangular bead with a single perforation was selected as a complete example of a Type 2a bead, found only in the PPNA assemblage (Fig. 2c).

The perforation of this bead is irregular, and a scan along the inner wall of the perforation reveals two locations where the diameter of the perforation changes (Fig. 11).

These may indicate the location where the perforations drilled from both sides of the object met, or the use of different drill sizes.

PARAGRAPH

A yellow-green rectangular bead identified as variscite by XRD and displaying a single incomplete perforation is an unfinished example of a Type 2a bead (Fig. 2d).

The bead displays two hemispherical indentations on opposite sides.

Photomicrographs show that the indentations exhibit gently sloping, symmetrical sides that are likely perforation pre-forms.

Furthermore, the indentations exhibit tool marks that follow concentric circular paths indicated by closely overlapping, highly regular and symmetrical grooves about 0.22 mm in width and depth present at the indentation base (Fig. 12).

The two perforation pre-forms on opposite sides of the bead are almost identical in shape and dimension, suggesting bi-directional perforation and the use of a technique involving concurrent working of perforation (Fig. 13).

Additionally, this unfinished rectangular bead was excavated along with two polished but broken variscite pieces that fit together.

The presence of an unfinished bead along with broken pieces, all of the same material, indicates that bead production was occurring on site.

PARAGRAPH

A ball-shaped bead displays a distinct marbled pattern of blue-green and light green streaks (Fig. 2b).

Both of the colors on this bead were separately characterized by XRD and identified as chrysocolla.

This bead has been broken approximately in half along the axis of the perforation, likely post-deposition since the perforation is complete.

A series of scans taken perpendicularly across the exposed perforation show that the width of the perforation narrows by approximately 0.25 mm from the edge to the center of the bead (Fig. 14).

PARAGRAPH

A green teardrop pendant composed of calcite and hydroxlapatite clearly exhibits evidence of bidirectional perforation as well (Fig. 2f).

Scans taken of the perforation profile on each side reveal a distinct constriction in the interior of the bead (Fig. 15).

The opening of the perforation on both sides is characterized by rounded edges and diameters of approximately 1.2 to 1.3 mm but there is a beveled lip in the interior of the object that lies approximately in the midline of the object and has a diameter of about 0.9 mm.

PARAGRAPH

A blue-green rectangular bead identified as chyrsocolla by XRD was broken during production and reveals additional information about the order of steps taken in bead production (Fig. 2g).

In this case, two perforations were begun on opposing sides of the bead, however the bead broke before these perforations met.

The exterior of the object is already polished, evidenced by high smoothness, and very fine polishing marks when viewed under a microscope.

This suggests that polishing took place before perforation.

The interior walls of both perforations are covered with visible tool marks, and alternate between regions of thick and thin tool marks.

The deep, narrow marks were created by a recently sharpened tool, and, as the tool became abraded and dulled, the marks became shallower and wider.

This repetitive variation in tool mark width can be seen along the perforation wall (Fig. 16), and suggests that the tool used to perforate the bead was sharpened during the procedure due to flaking on the borer's edge.

PARAGRAPH

A green rectangular bead with two parallel perforations (Type 2b; Fig. 2e) was determined via XRD to be composed of calcite and fluorapatite.

There is little evidence of tool marks or grooves present on the perforation walls.

These polishing marks on the bead only begin to be visible using digital microscopy at a magnification of 350× under raking light, are oriented in four major directions.

This indicates that the bead was polished in at least four directions.

PARAGRAPH

A blue-green faceted barrel (Type 5d), also identified as chrysocolla by XRD, is polished but not perforated (Fig. 2h).

Photomicrographs of the smoothly polished surface of the bead blank taken under raking light reveal numerous overlapping thin, long grooves (Fig. 17a).

At a magnification of 350×, even finer marks extending in three overlapping directions are discernible (Fig. 17b).

The widths of these marks cluster into three categories large (35–47 μm), medium (18–20 μm), and small (10–14 μm).

These marks may represent three distinct steps in the polishing of the bead blank, using grit of successively smaller diameter.

The clustering of the widths of these marks into three groups, the regularity of the marks being aligned in three axes, and the overall smooth, flat surface of the bead all suggest an intentional polishing process.

SECTION

Discussion

SECTION

Steps of bead manufacture

PARAGRAPH

Bidirectional perforation was codified into the PPNA technological system at el-Hemmeh and used to produce all beads, regardless of their size or thickness.

Beads were first roughly hewn into shape and then polished into a bead blank.

The polishing was carried out by rubbing the object against a finer and finer abrasive in varying directions, by hand.

The beads were then bidirectionally perforated, beginning on opposite sides and proceeding in an alternating fashion at approximately the same rate until the perforations met in the interior of the object.

This finding is in contrast to results from previous SEM studies, which posited that beads were perforated on one side to the center, then on the other side until the second perforation met the first in the middle of the bead (Wright et al., 2008).

Even if a full perforation could be achieved from one side alone, such as extremely thin beads (e.g. the disc bead with a thickness of less than 1 mm in Fig. 8), bidirectional perforation was performed.

PARAGRAPH

The tool marks in the interior of the analyzed PPNA stone beads are very regular and concentric, indicative of rotary drilling.

A flint drill was likely hafted to a wooden stick, as hand drilling should produce rough, irregular striations (Wright et al., 2008).

The highly parallel nature of the numerous drill marks in both sides of the perforation likely indicates the use of a bow drill to mechanically provide alternating and continuous motion (Semenov, 1964).

The regular pattern alternating between deeper and shallower marks also suggests the use of a self-sharpening tool (Gwinnett and Gorelick, 1987).

As the cutting edge of the tip wears, a piece breaks off and a new edge just as sharp as the last appears.

The use of a hafted flint borer operated by a bow drill is consistent with recent experimental evidence (Groman-Yaroslavski and Bar-Yosef Mayer, 2015).

The decision to use mechanical, rather than manual, perforation methods may point towards a desire for efficiency or rapidity in bead production due to craft specialization or increased production volume.

Bead-making flint tools, including awls and borers, have been recovered from PPNA Dhra' (Finlayson et al., 2002; Finlayson et al., 2003) and a large number of drill bits from LPPNB Al-Basît (Rollefson, 2002), and an array of borers, drills, perforators and micro-borers at Mezr'aa Teleilat located in Anatolia (Coşkunsu, 2008).

Some lithic tools, such as needle borers, from el-Hemmeh may have been associated with lapidary technologies and used as hafted drills (Makarewicz et al., 2006; Smith et al., 2016).

PARAGRAPH

Notably, there is no evidence for a final polishing step via tumbling for the PPNA beads.

In contrast, many LPPNB beads from el-Hemmeh are extremely smooth, indicating an additional step in the polishing process [e.g. red barrel-shaped bead (Fig. 3h)].

Multi-stage manufacturing sequences that included tumbling were in use by the MPPNB as evidenced by wear patterns on carnelian beads from Nahal Hemar similar to those generated in experimentally worked carnelian (Groman-Yaroslavski and Bar-Yosef Mayer, 2015).

SECTION

Change in color preference from the PPNA to the LPPNB

PARAGRAPH

The predominance of green beads in the PPNA assemblage from el-Hemmeh mirrors a pattern observed in other bead assemblages recovered from southern Levantine PPNA sites.

At Hatoula, 47% of the total bead assemblage (n = 47) included green beads, while the few beads recovered from Gilgal I (n = 3) and Gilgal III (n = 5) are mostly green (Bar-Yosef Mayer, 2008; Bar-Yosef Mayer and Porat, 2008; Lechevallier, 1994).

At Wadi Faynan 16, green beads comprise 68% (n = 19) of the assemblage (Critchley, 2012).

At el-Hemmeh, the wide variation in the raw material type and hardness of green beads strongly suggest that the primary selection criterion for beads was color.

The pronounced use of green beads at this time has been previously linked to nascent plant cultivation, which was underway during the PPNA.

This importance placed on green bead use at this time has been argued to indicate the emergence of symbolic systems concerned with successful germination and fertility (Bar-Yosef Mayer and Porat, 2008; Wright and Garrard, 2003).

PARAGRAPH

The decline in importance of green beads with a subsequent increase in red beads appears to have begun prior to the LPPNB.

While the frequency of red beads recovered from the Middle PPNB (ca 8100 to 7200 cal.

BC) site of Kfar HaHoresh located in the Galilee region is not reported, green beads decline in importance to only 33% (Bar-Yosef Mayer and Porat, 2008).

At several Middle PPNB sites located in Wadi Jilat, located in eastern Jordanian badia, green materials were selected for most conspicuous ornaments followed by red colored minerals (Wright and Garrard, 2003).

In the same region, red mineral use surpassed green minerals by the PPNC (6600 to 6250 cal.

BC).

Of the finished beads at Jilat 13, 40% (n = 62) are green and 44% (n = 68) are red while at Jilat 25, 20% (n = 24) of finished beads are green and 59% (n = 70) are red (Wright et al., 2008).

Green and red minerals recovered from both of these sites were sourced to the Dabba Marble Formation by comparing SEM results on the beads with XRD and XRF analyses on minerals sampled directly from the Dabba Formation.

PARAGRAPH

It seems as if the Dabba Marble Formation was accessed at el-Hemmeh as well, since the mineral composition of some green and red beads and raw material fall in line with the composition of Dabba Marble analyzed by Wright et al. (2008).

Notably, both green and red marble would have been available at the Dabba Marble Formation, which differ in their trace metal compositions and crystal structures due to weathering effects (Wright and Garrard, 2003).

Since both colors were available at the same location, material choice was dictated by cultural preference, and not necessity or access.

The red-colored marble was increasingly favored over the green, a pattern suggestive of a shift in symbolic meaning associated with these colors over time.

PARAGRAPH

Although it remains to be seen precisely what red beads signified, the marked decline in the importance of green beads in the LPPNB assemblage at el-Hemmeh, and the lower frequencies of green beads present at other LPPNB and PPNC sites in the region point towards changes in the social networks used to acquire raw materials or exchange beads, fashion, or the perceived status or desirability of differently colored materials.

Furthermore, despite an overall increase in variety in bead color and type in use during the LPPNB and el-Hemmeh, the diversity of raw material types used to make beads declined dramatically (Table 2).

SECTION

Bead manufacture constrained by materials properties but also defined by cultural preferences

PARAGRAPH

The raw minerals present in the PPNA assemblage represent a range of shades of green, textures, and hardnesses (SI Table B.2), and, notably, much of the raw material were too soft or crumbly to be workable.

This suggests that green minerals were brought to the site solely on the basis of color rather than suitability for bead making and provides further evidence that mineral selection was motivated not by material properties but guided by other cultural choices.

PARAGRAPH

Greenstone beads commonly used during the PPNA identified as copper minerals, including malachite and chrysocolla, were likely sourced from Wadi Faynan, a well-known copper ore site located about 50 km to the south of el-Hemmeh (Grattan et al., 2016), or Timna further south near the Red Sea (Hauptmann, 2004; Fig. 1).

Amazonite, a brilliant green mineral present as unworked stone in the PPNA assemblage, comes from one or two possible deposits located to the south near the Red Sea (Fig. 1).

Green marbles—the only greenstone used for beads in the LPPNB—were likely obtained from the Hatrurim and Dabba Marble Formations, located under 100 km to the northwest and northeast of el-Hemmeh, respectively (Wright et al., 2008; Bar-Yosef Mayer, 2013; Bar-Yosef Mayer and Porat, 2008; Fig. 1).

PARAGRAPH

Similar mineral sources were used at the Late PPNB site of Basta.

XRD study of greenstone material identified the use of amazonite from southern Jordan, hydroxylapatite from the Dabba Marble Formation, and copper-based minerals from both Feinan and Timna (Hauptmann, 2004).

However, the most prevalent greenstone at Basta was turquoise, sourced to the Sinai Peninsula.

No turquoise has been definitively identified at el-Hemmeh.

Additionally, while copper minerals are present at Basta, they are absent from the LPPNB deposits at el-Hemmeh.

This inter-settlement difference in mineral diversity suggests there was regional variation in Late PPNB exchange networks.

PARAGRAPH

The prevalence of raw stone material and the co-occurrence of unworked stone along with unfinished or completed stone beads at el-Hemmeh points towards local, on-site production during the PPNA.

On site bead manufacture has been argued for at PPNA Dhra', Wadi Faynan 16, and Huzuq Musa, where production steps include hewing, polishing and bidirectionally perforating (Critchley, 2012; Finlayson et al., 2011; Quinn, 2006; Rosenberg et al., 2010).

At el-Hemmeh, there is a somewhat higher abundance of raw stone material (n = 91) compared to identifiable beads (n = 70) found in the PPNA deposits, which include unfinished bead blanks, partially perforated beads, and beads that broke during production.

However, during the LPPNB there is a much lower quantity of raw stone material (n = 19) compared to finished beads (n = 70) and may indicate beads were brought back to the settlement as finished objects.

Alternatively, the regular occurrence of unworked pieces of raw mineral at el-Hemmeh may also indicate that such pieces were never intended to be worked into objects of personal ornamentation but were selected, transported, and curated for their color.

The presence at el-Hemmeh of raw mineral materials that were too soft to even produce a stone bead further highlights the potential importance of carrying items for their color properties and associated symbolic significance.

SECTION

Conclusions

PARAGRAPH

Material properties are intertwined in the social lives of people (Jones, 2004), and at el-Hemmeh people may have been choosing materials deliberately based on color in order to emphasize the symbolic meaning behind those colors.

The shift from the use of green beads during the PPNA to the use of red beads during the LPPNB, along with an increase of color vibrancy, level of polishing, and diversity of color and morphology seen in LPPNB beads suggest changes not only in how people expressed their affiliations and identities, but also in the exchange networks accessed by PPN communities.

Additional in-depth XRD and digital microscopy of both the PPNA and LPPNB assemblages from el-Hemmeh as well as other contemporaneous sites in the region would help better draw out regional variability in bead-based symbolling systems as well as exchange systems.

Such information incorporated alongside inventories of other material cultural found at the site such as shells from the Mediterranean and Red Seas and obsidian from Anatolia will help clarify the nature and scale of PPN exchange and social networks and their role in the spread and adoption of new subsistence technologies within the overall framework of the PPNB.