10.1016/j.jhep.2019.12.004

FULLTEXT

TITLE

ARRB1 inhibits non-alcoholic steatohepatitis progression by promoting GDF15 maturation

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

With the dramatic changes in people’s dietary choices and life styles, metabolic disorders including obesity, insulin resistance, and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) have become a public health issue worldwide [1, 2].

Excessive nutritional intake and decreased energy expenditure appear to be crucial in the pathogenesis of NAFLD.

NAFLD comprises a spectrum of liver diseases ranging from simple fatty liver to non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), which can potentially progress to cirrhosis and liver cancer [3, 4].

NASH is associated with reprogrammed hepatic metabolic profiles that lead to excessive lipid accumulation in the liver and imbalances in lipid metabolism and lipid catabolism [5, 6].

More advanced NASH is associated with impaired lipid metabolism, thus leading to the accumulation of triglycerides and other lipids in hepatocytes [7].

Lipotoxicity in the liver is the primary insult that initiates and propagates damage leading to hepatocyte injury and resultant inflammation [8].

Hepatic lipid homeostasis is fine-tuned by a complex machinery comprising hormones, signaling/transcriptional pathways, and downstream genes associated with lipogenesis and lipolysis [9].

Although many molecular regulatory networks have been described, the underlying mechanisms initiating the metabolic rearrangement and inflammatory response underlying NASH remain incompletely elucidated.

PARAGRAPH

β-arrestin1 (ARRB1), originally identified as a negative regulator of G protein-coupled receptor signaling, has been demonstrated to function as molecular scaffold that regulates cellular function by interacting with other partner proteins, and to be involve in multiple physiological process including immune response, tumorigenesis and inflammation [10-13].

ARRB1 has been found to regulate the NF-κB pathway in multiple inflammatory disease models [14, 15].

Our previous study has shown that ARRB1 participates in the regulating hepatocellular carcinoma aggressiveness through mediating the desensitization and internalization of CD97 [16].

Moreover, ARRB1 partially represses diet-induced obesity and improves glucose tolerance through interaction with PPARγ in preadipocytes [17].

However, the regulatory roles of ARRB1 in hepatic inflammation and lipid metabolism disorder during the progression of NASH remain unknown.

PARAGRAPH

The regulation of energy balance in the liver and other peripheral tissues is influenced by humoral factors that influence various metabolic activities such as lipolysis and lipogenesis.

Dysregulation of hormones or cytokines including leptin, adiponectin, and insulin are well documented to contribute to metabolic disorders and hepatic lipid accumulation.

Thus, more comprehensive elucidation of the causal mechanism underlying abnormal expression of these hormones or cytokines may enable the development of new therapeutic approaches for NASH.

GDF15 (also known as macrophage inhibitor 1), is predominantly expressed in the liver and is a member of the TGF-beta superfamily [18].

GDF15 is initially translated to pro-GDF15 in dimeric form and is subsequently cleaved and secreted as mature GFD15 dimers [19, 20].

Recent studies have shown that GDF15 activates AKT, ERK1/2, and PLCγ through binding GFRAL and through a GFRAL–RET complex present in cells, thus, reducing food intake, driving weight loss and enhancing glucose homeostasis [18, 21-23].

In addition, GDF15 alleviates fatty acid metabolic dysfunction in the liver, thus indicating that the liver is the direct target organ of GDF15 [24].

However, the post-translational regulation of GDF15, such as the maturation of pro-GDF15, and the downstream molecular mechanisms of GDF15 in hepatocytes, remain to be investigated.

PARAGRAPH

Here, our results demonstrate that ARRB1 expression is diminished in NASH patient liver samples and in mouse NASH models.

ARRB1 deficiency accelerates the development of steatohepatitis in HFD-/MCD diet-fed mice and upregulates of lipogenic genes and downregulates β-oxidative genes.

Functionally, ARRB1 interacts with GDF15 and facilitates the transportation of pro-GDF15 to the Golgi apparatus for cleavage and maturation, thereby promoting fatty acid β-oxidation and inhibiting de novo lipogenesis.

Thus, our results collectively indicate that ARRB1 is a critical regulator linking GDF15 maturation to the development of NASH.

SECTION

Materials and Methods

SECTION

Human Liver Samples

PARAGRAPH

Human liver samples with NASH were obtained from patients with NAFLD who were undergoing bariatric surgery (n=40).

All liver specimens were evaluated independently by three experienced pathologists, who are blinded to clinical data, according to the NAFLD activity score (NAS), defined as the sum of steatosis, inflammation and hepatocyte ballooning.

Patients with a NAS score ≥ 5 were considered likely to have NASH.

The exclusion criteria were the presence of other causes of liver disease, including alcohol ingestion greater than 20 g/day, chronic infection with hepatitis B and/or C virus, and other liver diseases.

Normal human liver samples were collected from 40 patients without NASH (patients with hepatic hemangioma) and were used as normal controls.

The study was approved by the Institutional Ethics Committee of Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital.

Informed consent for tissue analysis was obtained before surgery.

Detailed characteristics of patients with NASH are listed in Supplementary Table 1.

All research was performed in compliance with government policies and the Helsinki declaration.

All experiments were undertaken with the understanding and written consent of each subject.

SECTION

Animal Studies

PARAGRAPH

C57BL/6 mice were obtained from the Animal Research Center of Nanjing Medical University.

ARRB1 knockout (C57BL/6J background, Arrb1-/-) mice were a kind gift from Dr. Bin Wei (Shanghai University, Shanghai, China).

Male wild type (WT) and Arrb1-/- mice 8 weeks of age were fed either low-fat diet (LFD) or HFD (Bio Serv) for 26 weeks.

In another NASH model, male 8 weeks of age WT and Arrb1-/- mice were fed with MCD diet (Research Diets) or chow diet for 6 weeks.

All mice were housed under specific pathogen-free and controlled temperature conditions with a 12-h light-dark cycle at 22°C to 24°C, and 6–10-week-old male mice were used for the experiments.

All animal studies were approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee of Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital and were carried out in accordance with the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals.

SECTION

Statistical Analyses

PARAGRAPH

All data were analyzed with two-tailed Student’s t test or one-way ANOVA followed by post hoc t tests.

Data are presented as mean ± SD unless stated.

Significance was established at p ≤ 0.05.

Statistical analysis was performed in GraphPad Prism Version 7.0.

PARAGRAPH

Details on other materials and methods are provided in the Supplementary Materials.

SECTION

Results

PARAGRAPH

Patients with NASH and mouse models of NASH have low hepatic levels of ARRB1.

PARAGRAPH

To investigate the involvement of ARRB1 in NASH, we first analyzed the expression of ARRB1 in liver samples from 40 normal patients without NASH and 40 pathologically diagnosed patients with NASH.

Both hepatic ARRB1 mRNA and protein levels were significantly lower in patients with NASH than those without NASH (Fig. 1A-1C).

Moreover, ARRB1expression was lower at both mRNA and protein levels in the liver of WT mice fed with HFD than LFD for 26 weeks, or MCD diet than CD for 6 weeks (Fig. 1D-1F).

To explore the potential role of ARRB1-in NASH progression, we used Arrb1-/- and WT mice fed with HFD for 26 weeks or MCD diet for 6 weeks to construct NASH models.

H&E, Oil Red O, Sirius Red and IHC staining revealed that the degree of steatosis, ballooning fat droplet and fibrosis accumulation were aggravated in the livers of mice fed with HFD or MCD diet, and these effects were further exacerbated by ARRB1 deficiency (Fig. 1G).

Although WT mice on the HFD showed nearly no liver fibrosis, the Arrb1-/- mice showed liver fibrosis to some extent (Fig. 1G).

Significantly higher liver injury markers (ALT and AST) and levels of liver triglycerides (TG) were observed in Arrb1-/- mice than in WT mice under HFD or MCD diet (Fig. 1H).

To obtain further insight into steatohepatitis, we evaluated the transcriptional levels of genes implicated in hepatic inflammation, fibrogenesis, lipogenesis and β-oxidation.

ARRB1 deficiency significantly increased the mRNA levels of inflammatory, fibrosis and lipogenesis associated genes, but decreased the mRNA levels of β-oxidation associated genes (Supplementary Fig. 1A and 1B).

Furthermore, F4/80 immunofluorescence staining showed that there were more macrophages infiltrated in the liver of Arrb1-/- mice than WT mice fed with HFD, as expected in the MCD diet induced NASH model (Supplementary Fig. 1C).

In addition, infiltrated macrophages and neutrophils were detected by flow cytometry, and significantly higher levels were observed in the CD11b+F4/80+ and CD11b+Ly6G+ cell infiltrating fractions in the liver in mice receiving HFD or MCD diet treatment than in WT mice (Supplementary Fig. 1D).

Together, these findings indicate that ARRB1 is downregulated in the liver tissues in NASH and ARRB1 deficiency promotes the development of steatohepatitis.

SECTION

Loss of ARRB1 induces lipid metabolism disorder and the activation of NF-κB in vitro.

PARAGRAPH

Studies have revealed that both hepatocytes and Kupffer cells participate in the regulation of steatohepatitis.

To further investigate the function of ARRB1 in the development of steatohepatitis, we isolated primary hepatocytes and Kupffer cells for further study.

Followed qPCR, western blot, and immunofluorescence staining analyses revealed that ARRB1 was not expressed in Kupffer cells (Fig. 2A–2C).

Next, we focused on the function of ARRB1 in hepatocytes.

Similarly, both the mRNA and protein levels of ARRB1 were downregulated after treatment with palmitic acid (PA) (Fig. 2D and 2E).

Oil Red O staining and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) revealed that loss of ARRB1 resulted in more accumulation of larger lipid droplets in hepatocytes (Fig. 2F).

Similar results were also obtained in HepG2 cells (in which ARRB1 was knocked out by CRISPR Cas9; Fig. 2G).

The NF-κB signaling pathway plays a crucial role in the pathogenesis of steatohepatitis, as demonstrated by a previous study, in which treatment with PA promoted the phosphorylation of P65 and elicited recruitment of Brg1 and Brm to the promoter regions of Il1b, Il6, and Mcp1 in cultured hepatocyte [25].

In addition, ARRB1 has been reported to be involved in regulation of the NF-κB signaling pathway [26].

Therefore, we hypothesized that ARRB1 might participate in the activation of P65 during PA treatment.

As shown in Supplementary Fig. 2A–2D, loss of ARRB1 augmented the protein level of p-P65, nuclear translocation of P65, and the transcriptional levels of Il1b, Il6, Tnfa and Mcp1 after PA treatment.

To further examine the function of ARRB1 on steatohepatitis, we overexpressed ARRB1 in primary hepatocytes and HepG2 cells, and found that overexpression of ARRB1 attenuated the accumulation of lipid droplets and inhibited the phosphorylation of P65 induced by ARRB1 deficiency (Fig. 2G and 2H and Supplementary Fig. 2E, 2F).

ARRB1 overexpression also decreased the mRNA levels of lipogenesis associated genes and increased the mRNA levels of β-oxidation associated genes (Fig. 2I).

Collectively, these data illustrate that loss of ARRB1 promotes the accumulation of lipid droplets and the activation of NF-κB in hepatocytes.

SECTION

ARRB1 interacts with pro-GDF15 and decreases the expression of pro-GDF15 in cytoplasm.

PARAGRAPH

Work over the past several decades has shown that ARRB1 regulates specific cellular functions by interacting with specific partner proteins [27].

To explore the molecular mechanisms through which ARRB1 exerts its function in NASH, we performed co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) experiments and liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) to qualitatively analyze ARRB1 binding protein.

LC-MS/MS analysis identified that ARRB1 interacts with GDF15 (Fig. 3A), a distant member of the TGF-beta superfamily [20] that is expressed predominantly in the liver [28] and plays a prominent role in obesity and energy metabolism [29].

Then, Co-IP experiments and double immunofluorescence staining demonstrated a direct interaction between ARRB1 and GDF15 (Fig. 3B and 3C).

To further explore which domain of GDF15 is essential for the interaction with ARRB1, we constructed His-GDF15 truncations and co-transfected them with Flag-ARRB1 into HepG2 cells.

Immunoprecipitation results revealed that residues 1–196 of GDF15 were indispensable for binding to ARRB1 (Fig. 3D, left panel), and that this domain belonged to the GDF15 propeptide.

Furthermore, the interaction between ARRB1 and GDF15 was completely abolished by mutation of residues 1–196 of Flag-GDF15 (Fig. 3D, right panel).

Interestingly, western blot analysis and immunofluorescence revealed that ARRB1 knockout increased the accumulation of pro-GDF15 in the cytoplasm, whereas ARRB1 overexpression decreased the accumulation of pro-GDF15 (Fig. 3E and 3F).

Similar observations were found in HepG2 cells with ARRB1 knockdown via ARRB1-shRNA, in case there might have been off-target effects of CRISPR/Cas9 (Fig. 3E and Supplementary Fig. 3A).

However, ELISA revealed that knockout or knockdown of ARRB1 decreased the secretion of mature GDF15, whereas ARRB1 overexpression increased the production of mature GDF15 in HepG2 cells (Fig. 3G and 3H).

The interaction between ARRB1 and the propeptide of GDF15 may promote the conversion from pro-GDF15 to mature GDF15.

SECTION

ARRB1 enhances the transportation of pro-GDF15 to the Golgi apparatus and promotes the secretion of mature GDF15.

PARAGRAPH

To further clarify that ARRB1 influences the maturation of GDF15 by interacting with pro-GDF15 propeptide, we confirmed that neither knockout nor overexpression of ARRB1 altered the mRNA levels of GDF15 in HepG2 cells (Supplementary Fig. 3B and 3C).

Then, HepG2 cells were transfected with either pro-GDF15-His or pro-GDF15-His/ARRB1-Flag.

Cycloheximide (Chx) or bafilomycin (Baf) was added to decrease possible interference from overexpression of proteins and lysosomal processing.

In the presence of ARRB1, increased amounts of mature GDF15 peptide was detected in cell lysates.

Simultaneously, more mature GDF15 was also detected in the culture medium of the co-transfected cells (Fig. 4A).

Moreover, previous studies have shown that pro-GDF15 is cleaved by PCSK3, PCSK5, PCSK6 and MMP26 at the proconvertase cleavage site, thus generating mature GDF15 [30-32].

We found that ARRB1 did not change the expression of PCSK3, PCSK5, PCSK6, and MMP26 (Fig. 4B and Supplementary Fig. 3D), nor did it influence the activity of PCSK3, -5 and -6 , on the basis of detection of concentrations of VEGF-C, the product of PCSK3,-5and -6 [33](Supplementary Fig. 3E).

Because studies have validated that the maturation process of GDF15 occurs in the Golgi apparatus [34], we next sought to detect the subcellular localization of pro-GDF15 by immunostaining.

We found that pro-GDF15 was abundantly distributed throughout the cytoplasm of the ARRB1 knockout HepG2 cells.

In contrast, most of the pro-GDF15 localized in the Golgi apparatus in the presence of ARRB1 overexpression (Fig. 4C).

In addition, the concentration of serum GDF15 was diminished in ARRB1 knockout mice, whereas the concentration of serum GDF15 was elevated in mice with hepatocytes specific overexpression of Arrb1 by injection of AAV-Arrb1 (Fig. 4D).

Because exposure to chronic high-fat or acute lysine-deficient diets increases GDF15 levels [35], we detected the alterations in serum GDF15 in HFD-fed or MCD diet-fed mice.

The concentration of serum GDF15 was significantly decreased in Arrb1 knockout mice and was clearly increased in AAV-Arrb1 injected mice (Fig. 4E and 4F).

Growing evidence indicates that the anorectic effects of GDF15 are mediated through GFRAL, and RET is a known coreceptor for the GFRAL [21-23].

Because ARRB1 promotes the maturation and secretion of GDF15 in hepatocytes, we sought to examine whether ARRB1 might affect the downstream pathway of GDF15.

We first validated the expression of GFRAL and RET in the human liver with or without NASH by immunofluorescence and western blot analysis and made similar observations in primary mouse hepatocytes and HepG2 cells (Fig. 4G, 4H and Supplementary Fig. 3F).

Next, we investigated the activation status of the downstream signaling pathways of GDF15 after ARRB1 alteration.

As shown in Fig. 4I, the expression of p-RET, p-AKT, and p-ERK was decreased by ARRB1 knockout and was increased by ARRB1 overexpression; furthermore, the phosphorylation status of RET, AKT and ERK was positively correlated with GDF15 stimulation, regardless of ARRB1 expression.

Collectively, these data supported our hypothesis that ARRB1 promotes the maturation of GDF15 in vitro and in vivo and activates the downstream pathway of GDF15 in the liver.

SECTION

ARRB1 regulates fatty acid de novo lipogenesis and β-oxidation in a GDF15-dependent manner.

PARAGRAPH

Hepatocytes harvested from Arrb1-/- and WT mice fed with HFD for 26 weeks were subjected to RNA sequencing analysis (n=3) (Supplementary Fig. 3G).

The fatty acid degradation and PPAR signaling pathway were markedly inhibited in ARRB1 knockout hepatocytes according to KEGG pathway enrichment analysis (Fig. 5A).

Additionally, Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis showed that ARRB1 deficiency downregulated the category of lipid metabolic process and upregulated the category of inflammatory response (Supplementary Fig. 3H).

Previous studies have indicated that ARRB1 represses diet-induced obesity by down-regulating adipogenesis related genes [36], and the GDF15 downstream molecule, p-ERK, represses PPARγ transcriptional activity by inhibiting ligand binding and altering cofactor recruitment [37].

Moreover, GDF15 has been reported to promote fatty acid β-oxidation in the liver by upregulating PPARα [24].

Increased hepatic p-AKT levels protect the liver against steatosis in diabetes [38].

Therefore, we addressed the question of whether ARRB1 might regulate metabolic pathways by interacting with GDF15.

As expected, our results revealed that ARRB1 inhibited expression of fatty acid lipogenesis related proteins and promote β-oxidation associated proteins by regulating GDF15 in primary hepatocytes (Fig. 5B).

Similar results were obtained in HepG2 cells (Supplementary Fig. 4A and 4B).

Then, we used a PPARα antagonist (GW6471) to inhibit PPARα activity and used the ligands of PPARα (Fenofibrate) and PPARα agonist (GW7647) to stimulate PPARα activity.

As shown in Fig. 5C, both basal and ARRB1 overexpression or recombinant GDF15 induced expression of lipogenesis associated proteins was inhibited by GW6471.

In contrast, basal ARRB1 knockout or si-GDF15 induced downregulation of lipogenesis related proteins was increased by Fenofibrate or GW7647 (Fig. 5D).

Similar observations were obtained from the levels of β-hydroxybutyrate (β-HB), a product of FA oxidation (Fig. 5E, 5F and Supplementary Fig. 4C).

Furthermore, we observed that overexpression of ARRB1 or the use of recombinant GDF15 result in significantly lower TG levels and liver lipid accumulation in ARRB1 knockout hepatocytes and HepG2 cells than in controls (Fig. 5G and Supplementary Fig. 4D, 4E).

Similar observations were found regarding lipogenesis inhibition with lipogenesis inhibitors (C75 and cerulenin) (Fig. 5H).

Together, these data suggest that ARRB1 inhibits lipogenesis and promotes β-oxidation in a GDF15 dependent manner.

SECTION

Re-expression of ARRB1 in mice alleviates HFD or MCD diet induced steatohepatitis.

PARAGRAPH

To explore whether re-expression of ARRB1 might attenuate NASH in vivo, we used AAV to overexpress ARRB1 (Fig. 6A and Fig. 7A).

Interestingly, various analysis of HFD- or MCD diet-induced NASH livers indicated that mice with ARRB1 re-expression had less steatosis, inflammation, fibrosis, liver weight, serum liver enzymes, hepatic TG contents, and inflammatory cytokines, but more β-HB (Fig. 6B–6D and Fig. 7B, C).

In addition, WT mice injected with AAV-pro-Gdf15 showed improvement in steatohepatitis to some degree, whereas, no amelioration was observed in ARRB1 knockout mice (Fig. 6B–6D and Fig. 7B, 7C).

Similarly, lower levels of serum GDF15 were observed in ARRB1 knockout mice fed with HFD or MCD diet after injection with AAV-pro-Gdf15 than in WT mice (Supplementary Fig. 5A and 5B).

Conversely, mice injected with AAV-Arrb1 and AAV-pro-Gdf15 showed dramatically decreased degrees of steatohepatitis (Fig. 6B–6D and Fig. 7B, 7C).

Furthermore, the GDF15 Fc fusion protein markedly reversed steatohepatitis induced by ARRB1 deficiency (Fig. 6B-6D and Fig. 7B, 7C).

A previous study has shown GDF15 protects cell against macrophage-mediated killing [39].

F4/80 immunofluorescence showed fewer infiltrated macrophages in livers of HFD or MCD diet fed mice after injection with AAV-Arrb1 or AAV-Arrb1+AAV-pro-Gdf15 (Supplementary Fig. 5C and 5D).

Overall, these data further imply the essential function of ARRB1 in promoting the maturation of GDF15, and that ARRB1 overexpression in the liver protects liver against NASH pathogenesis in a GDF15 dependent manner.

SECTION

The severity of liver disease in patients with NASH is negatively correlated with ARRB1 expression.

PARAGRAPH

To explore the clinical relevance of the above animal-based observation, we divided patients with NASH into two groups, an ARRB1 high expression group (20/40, ARRB1high) and an ARRB1 low expression group (20/40, ARRB1low), according to the median value of ARRB1 detected by qPCR.

There were statistical differences observed between the two groups.

The degree of steatosis, fibrosis, inflammation and liver lipogenesis was significantly lower, whereas β-oxidation was higher in the ARRB1high group than the ARRB1low group (Fig. 8A-8C).

Furthermore, Pearson correlation analysis revealed that NAS, serum ALT, AST, and TG were negatively correlated with ARRB1 mRNA level (Fig. 8D), Moreover, the level of mature GDF15 was significantly higher in the liver in the ARRB1high group than the ARRB1low group (Fig. 8E).

Similarly, the serum level of circulating GDF15 was higher in the ARRB1high group than the ARRB1low group (Fig. 8F).

Together, these data indicate that the severity of liver disease in patients with NASH was negatively correlated with ARRB1 expression.

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

This study demonstrates that ARRB1 plays an important role in the pathogenesis of NASH.

The expression of ARRB1 was diminished in livers from patients or mice with NASH.

Moreover, deletion of ARRB1 significantly exacerbated hepatic steatosis, fibrosis, and inflammation in both HFD- and MCD diet-fed mouse models.

Mechanistically, ARRB1 interacts with pro-GDF15 and promotes its localization in the Golgi apparatus for the process of cleavage/maturation.

PARAGRAPH

ARRB1 was originally identified and characterized on the basis of its function of desensitizing activated G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs)[10].

In addition, ARRB1 is sought to function as a molecular scaffold that controls the spatiotemporal distribution of partner proteins [11].

However, the mechanisms underlying the regulation of downstream pathways by ARRB1 and its regulatory role in NASH development remain unclear.

Here, we observed diminished expression of ARRB1 in NASH samples from patients and mice.

Indeed, ARRB1 expression was negatively correlated with the severity of liver damage in patients with NASH.

Moreover, genetic deletion of ARRB1 promoted NASH development in mice fed HFD or MCD diets.

These results indicated that ARRB1 is a potential protective factor against NASH and its downregulation might be a key event during NASH development.

ARRB1 has been reported to be inhibited by microRNAs in glioma and breast cancer [40, 41].

We did not identify the regulatory mechanism of ARRB1 downregulation in this article and our further studies will aim to elucidate its expression regulation.

A previous study showed that both ARRB1 and ARRB2 interact with IκBα, and only ARRB1, but not ARRB2, regulates the NF-κB response to TNFα [26].

We found that ARRB1 deletion increased the activation of p65 in primary hepatocytes and its downstream gene expression levels.

Given the vital role of macrophages in steatohepatitis [42], we sought to investigate whether ARRB1 deficiency might alter the function of Kupffer cells.

In liver with steatohepatitis, ARRB1 knockout increased the infiltration of macrophages.

However, our results indicated that ARRB1 is not expressed in Kupffer cells.

Thus, we presumed that the reasons why ARRB1 deficiency in the liver increases macrophage infiltration are mainly due to the damage to hepatocytes and the hepatic microenvironment.

PARAGRAPH

As a distant member of the TGF-beta superfamily, human GDF15 is a product of a two exon gene, which is translated into a 308 amino acid protein including a propetide of 167 amino acids and a mature domain of 112 amino acids, separated by proconvertase cleavage [32, 34].

The propeptide can facilitate correct folding of GDF15 [34].

We found that ARRB1 binds the propeptide of GDF15.

Furthermore, the metabolic effect of GDF15 is conveyed by GFRAL, whose expression is restricted to the central nervous system.

However, GFRAL is expressed in other organs and cell lines, many of which have been reported to exhibit a biological response after treatment with GDF15 [22].

GDF15 is clearly a protective factor against metabolic disorders including obesity, insulin resistance and liver steatohepatitis [43-45].

Emerging evidence has indicated that treatment or overexpression of GDF15 decreases the body weight and improves metabolic profiles in mice and monkeys [29, 46].

Moreover, increasing studies reveal that hepatic GDF15 promotes fatty acid β-oxidation and ketogenesis of the liver during fasting and is highly effective in decreasing adiposity and correcting the metabolic dysfunction in mice fed with HFD [24, 47].

Although HFD exposure increases GDF15 levels, the increase in GDF15 does not reverse obesity [35].

Nevertheless, deletion of GDF15 increases body weight, levels of serum TNF-α and IL-6, and inflammatory changes within liver tissue [46, 48].

Therefore, we speculated that the increase in GDF15 might not be sufficient to decrease body weight by reducing food intake, but this aspect of GDF15 may play an indispensable role in balancing energy metabolism.

Most studies in animal models of inflammation strongly suggest that GDF15 has an overall beneficial effect on disease outcomes.

In our work, we firstly demonstrated that ARRB1 interacts with pro-GDF15 in the cytoplasm and promotes the secretion of mature GDF15.

Furthermore, RNA sequencing results revealed that loss of ARRB1 upregulates inflammatory genes and downregulates lipid metabolic processes.

We propose that ARRB1 participates in hepatic lipid metabolism by regulating GDF15.

PARAGRAPH

Similar to many other proteins, GDF15 is regulated at the levels of transcription, translation, and maturation.

Inhibition of PACE4 decreases the serum level of mature GDF15 but increases the intracellular levels of pro-GDF15 [32], mainly because PACE4 and PCSK isoforms are involved in GDF15 cleavage to produce mature GDF15 [31].

However, whether other mechanisms might function in the post-transcriptional regulation of GDF15 remains unclear.

Here, we observed that ARRB1 increased the transport of pro-GDF15 to the Golgi apparatus and our data indicated that ARRB1 deficiency impeded GDF15 secretion via inhibiting the maturation of pro-GDF15 both in vitro and in vivo.

As p-ERK is activated by GFRAL-RET complex, loss of ARRB1 downregulates the level of p-ERK and p-AKT.

Therefore, the ARRB1-GDF15-GFRAL-RET axis can significantly alter the fatty acid de novo lipogenesis and β-oxidation in hepatocytes.

Importantly, we observed that simultaneous overexpression of ARRB1 and GDF15 improved hepatic steatosis, fibrosis, and inflammation, however, the promoting effect of GDF15 was not observed in ARRB1 knockout mice.

We speculated that the main reason for these findings might be that pro-GDF15 was not transported to the Golgi apparatus for cleavage and production of mature GDF15 in the absence of ARRB1.

This function may help to determine the precise regulation of GDF15 in post-translational level and may explain why overexpression of ARRB1 alleviates diet-induced steatohepatitis.

PARAGRAPH

In summary, our findings summarized in the graphical abstract indicate that ARRB1 plays an essential role in the maturation of GDF15 and the pathogenesis of steatohepatitis.

Thus, we propose ARRB1 as a potential therapeutic target for counteracting the development of NASH by using an ARRB1 agonist or manipulating the expression of ARRB1 combined with GDF15.