10.1016/j.jhep.2018.05.004

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Hepatitis B virus-specific T cell responses after stopping nucleos(t)ide analogue therapy in HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis B

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) chronically infects around 250 million individuals worldwide and can cause liver cirrhosis as well as hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).1

The treatment options for chronic hepatitis B (CHB) are either pegylated interferon-alfa (PEG-IFNα) or nucleos(t)ide analogues (NA).

PEG-IFNα has the advantage of finite treatment with higher rates of anti-HBs seroconversion of around 10%, but is associated with considerable side effects.2

Thus, well-tolerated NAs are most commonly used.

NAs efficiently suppress viral replication in most patients, have a beneficial effect on disease progression, and reduce the risk of HCC development.2

Still, NAs only have minor, if any, effect on covalently closed circular DNA (cccDNA).

For this reason, functional cure is a rare event and most patients with CHB require life-long therapy, particularly HBV e antigen (HBeAg)-negative patients.2

PARAGRAPH

To prevent life-long treatment, novel strategies to treat HBV infections are being evaluated.

As such, discontinuation of NA therapy was proven to be safe in HBeAg-negative patients.

It frequently leads to an early virological relapse but a fraction of patients experience functional cure.3–8

For instance, a study by Hadziyannis and colleagues showed that 39% of HBeAg-negative patients cleared HBV surface antigen (HBsAg) during a 5.5-year follow-up after stopping long-term adefovir treatment.7

Our group and a study by Berg et al. showed similar results with around 20% of the patients experiencing HBsAg loss.5,6

As a consequence, stopping rules for well-selected HBeAg-negative patients were recently introduced into the new European Association for the Study of the Liver guidelines for the treatment of HBV.2

PARAGRAPH

Recently, we reported that the peak level of HBV DNA at relapse and an increase of alanine aminotransferase (ALT) after treatment discontinuation are associated with subsequent HBsAg loss.5

In line with this, plasma cytokines, chemokines, and growth factors were induced during HBV DNA relapse.5

This implies that consequences of active HBV replication after discontinuation of NA therapy, like an altered cytokine milieu and higher amounts of viral antigens, could be activators of immune responses.

T cells are thought to be the major contributors in controlling HBV, primarily via direct killing of infected hepatocytes or noncytolytic degradation of cccDNA.9

However, in contrast to a self-limiting acute infection, T cell responses in patients with CHB are described as hardly detectable and display a functionally exhausted phenotype, probably due to persistent exposure to high antigen loads.10

It has been described that NA therapy can partially recover T cell responses, especially in patients with HBsAg loss.11,12

However, whether discontinuation of NA therapy and virological relapse can induce multi-functional T cell responses, which may also contribute to HBsAg decline or even HBsAg loss, has not been studied so far.

Therefore, the aim of this study was to investigate T cell phenotype and function longitudinally after discontinuation of NA therapy, as well as the effect of PD-L1 blocking on the in vitro responsiveness of T cells, to further elucidate the immunological responses after NA discontinuation.

SECTION

Patients and methods

SECTION

Study design

PARAGRAPH

Fifteen HBeAg-negative patients with CHB were recruited in a prospective proof-of-concept trial to investigate the effect of stopping NA therapy on T cell responses.

Before discontinuation of NA therapy, the patients had been on therapy for at least three years with HBV DNA levels lower than 20 IU/ml.

Furthermore, all patients had HBsAg levels lower than 3,500 IU/ml (Fig. S1).

The mean age was 49.1 years (range: 33–65 years).

Thirteen out of 15 patients were cytomegalovirus (CMV)-positive.

Three patients were infected with genotype B, one patient with genotype C, 10 with genotype D and for one patient the genotype was not available.

Detailed clinical characteristics of the patients have been published elsewhere.5

Ten healthy individuals with a mean age of 34.2 years (range: 27–60) were included as controls.

Five of these were female, four male, and for one sex was not known.

Four of the healthy individuals were CMV-negative, four positive, and for two patients CMV serostatus was not available.

As a control, four chronically HBV infected patients with continuous NA treatment were included, with a mean age of 57.5 years (range: 25–82 years).

Two out of these four patients were CMV-positive.

Written informed consent was obtained from each patient included in this study and the study protocol conforms to the ethical guidelines of the 1975 Declaration of Helsinki as reflected in a priori approval by the ethical committee of Hannover Medical School on 25 May 2011.

SECTION

Human peripheral blood mononuclear cells

PARAGRAPH

Blood was collected at discontinuation of NA treatment (baseline) and 4, 8, and 12 weeks thereafter.

For two patients, samples taken at week 2 and week 24 were grouped with baseline and week 12, respectively.

Human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated using Ficoll Hypaque density gradient centrifugation (BioColl separating solution, Biochrom AG) and cryopreserved in liquid nitrogen for deferred analysis.

SECTION

Ex vivo flow cytometry experiments

PARAGRAPH

For extracellular staining, thawed PBMCs were stained for 15–20 min at room temperature.

After fixation and permeabilization (eBioscience) for 30 min at room temperature (RT), intracellular markers were stained for 30 min in Permwash buffer (eBioscience).

Besides the staining with fluorochrome-labelled antibodies (see Table S1), dead cell exclusion with a LIVE/DEAD Aqua cell stain kit (Life technologies) was performed.

For visualisation of biotinylated and purified antibodies, streptavidin-conjugated or anti-IgM secondary antibodies were used.

Samples were acquired on a 20-parameter 5-laser BD LSR Fortessa instrument (BD Biosciences) or on a 16-parameter 3-laser BD LSR Fortessa (BD Biosciences).

SECTION

In vitro HBV-specific flow cytometry experiments

PARAGRAPH

Thawed PBMCs were stimulated for 10 days with 15-mer HBV-specific overlapping peptides (genotype D, proimmune).

Forty-one core-specific peptides (four pools), 165 polymerase-specific peptides (eight pools), and 76 envelope-specific peptides (seven pools) were pooled and used for stimulation at day zero and for restimulation at day 10.

For T cell restoration experiments anti-PD-L1 (clone M1H1, eBioscience) and MitoTempo (10 μM, Sigma-Aldrich) were added together with the overlapping peptides.

The cultures were supplemented with rhIL-2 (5 U/ml; Invitrogen Life Technologies) at days 4 and 8.

After restimulation at day 10, PBMCs were incubated for 6 h. Brefeldin A (2 μg/ml; Sigma-Aldrich) was present for the final 5 h. For cell surface staining, PBMCs were stained for 15 min at 4 degrees (see Table S1 for antibodies).

After fixation and permeabilization for 30 min at room temperature using a Cytofix/Cyitoperm kit (BD Bioscience), cells were stained for intracellular cytokines for 30 min.

Dead cell exclusion with a LIVE/DEAD Aqua cell stain kit (Life technologies) was performed.

Samples were acquired on a BD FACSCanto II (BD Bioscience) and on a 16-parameter 3-laser BD LSR Fortessa (BD Biosciences).

SECTION

Analysis of flow cytometry data

PARAGRAPH

Flow cytometry results were analysed using FlowJo version 9.9.4 (Treestar).

Spice version 5.3 (provided by Mario Roederer and Joshua Nozzi, NIH) was used to illustrate the multi-functional T cell data.

Stochastic neighbour embedding (SNE) analysis was performed using R to illustrate high dimensional analysis of flow cytometry data for 2,000 cells per analysed sample (version 3.3.1, The R Foundation for Statistical Computing).

For the SNE analysis an in-house built script was used, as previously described.13

SECTION

Statistical analysis

PARAGRAPH

After testing for normality using D’Agostino-Pearson omnibus normality test, non-parametric methods (Wilcoxon matched pairs, Kruskal-Wallis test, Spearman correlation) or parametric methods (Student’s paired t test, One-way Anova, Pearson correlation) were used for statistical analysis (GraphPad 6.0, GraphPad Software, Inc., USA).

The cohort with 15 patients enabled performance of these tests.

However, as only three patients lost HBsAg, it was not possible to statistically compare patients with HBsAg loss and retained HBsAg.

PARAGRAPH

For further details regarding the materials used, please refer to the CTAT table.

SECTION

Results

SECTION

Patient characteristics

PARAGRAPH

Details on the clinical characteristics after stopping therapy have been published elsewhere.5

Of importance for the current study is that shortly after treatment discontinuation 13 out of 15 patients relapsed.

HBV DNA increased rapidly already 4 weeks after stopping therapy and peaked at week 8.

This was followed by an ALT increase at week 8, which peaked at week 12.

HBsAg levels remained stable until week 12, but were significantly decreased 48 weeks after stopping treatment (Fig. S1).

During long-term follow-up, three patients cleared HBsAg.

Patients were retreated if HBV DNA levels exceeded 2,000 IU/ml.

After retreatment, patients had suppressed DNA levels at week 48 and normalised ALT levels at week 24 after stopping treatment.

SECTION

T cell phenotype in long-term NA treated patients with CHB differs from healthy individuals

PARAGRAPH

Before analysing any changes in T cell phenotype after stopping NA treatment, we characterised the baseline differences between HBeAg-negative patients with CHB on long-term NA therapy compared to healthy individuals.

Median frequencies of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, CD4+ regulatory T cells, and gamma delta T cells were not significantly altered in patients with CHB before discontinuation of therapy, compared to healthy individuals (Fig. S2A).

PARAGRAPH

The detailed T cell phenotype was assessed ex vivo by staining of nine T cell markers followed by SNE analysis (Fig. 1A, B).

The residual map, showing clusters being more abundant in patients with CHB under NA therapy (red shading) or healthy individuals (blue shading), revealed that the overall T cell phenotype was considerably altered during CHB.

For interpretation of the data, the residual plot was superimposed on the nine ex vivo markers in separated SNE plots.

For CD4+ T cells, compared to healthy individuals, patients with CHB showed a distinctly higher expression of CD161 and PD-1 and a lower expression of CCR7 and CD45RA (Fig. 1A).

For CD8+ T cells, the detected alterations were more pronounced with CD57, CD25, KLRG1, Granzyme B, CD161 and PD-1 being upregulated while CCR7, and CD45RA were downregulated compared to controls (Fig. 1B).

T cells in patients with CHB displayed a more differentiated phenotype with higher frequencies of central and effector memory cells, as well as, for CD8+ T cells, more terminally differentiated TEMRA cells (Fig. 1C, D).

In summary, despite long-term suppression of HBV viral load with NAs, the T cell phenotype is considerably altered in patients with CHB compared to healthy individuals.

SECTION

Alteration of T cell phenotype in CHB patients after discontinuation of NA therapy

PARAGRAPH

To evaluate the impact of NA discontinuation on the T cell phenotype, we performed pairwise analysis of the SNE data, comparing baseline with week 4, 8, and 12 after stopping treatment.

In contrast to the substantial alterations in T cell phenotype compared to healthy individuals, only minor alterations were noted when the cells were characterised longitudinally following treatment discontinuation (Fig. 1E, F; Fig. S3).

As the differences in the SNE analysis (Fig. S3) were minimal, we went on to assess the data using conventional flow cytometry analysis and included additional markers (Fig. 1G, H; Fig. S2B, C).

Conventional analysis confirmed that the T cell phenotype was only slightly changed after NA discontinuation.

Minor, albeit significant, changes after discontinuation of therapy were observed for PD-1 on CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, TCF-1 on CD4+, and CD161 on CD8+ T cells.

Interestingly, especially markers associated with T cell exhaustion (PD-1, KLRG1, T-bet, TCF-1) were altered after NA discontinuation.

SECTION

T cell phenotype of CHB patients experiencing HBsAg loss

PARAGRAPH

Next, we set out to explore if patients with HBsAg loss during follow-up exhibit a different expression pattern of ex vivo T cell markers.

Indeed, these patients expressed low levels of PD-1, as well as KLRG1, and the levels remained below the mean expression observed within the total cohort (Fig. 2A, B).

Furthermore, PD-1+ CD8+ T cells positively correlated with HBsAg levels at baseline (Fig. 2C).

Interestingly, only patients with subsequent HBsAg loss showed an increase in the expression of Ki-67 and CD38 at week 12 after stopping treatment (Fig. 2D, E).

In line with this, the frequency of Ki-67/CD38 double-positive T cells at week 12 was positively associated with the fold decline of HBsAg at week 48 (Fig. 2F).

Taken together, T cells of patients with subsequent HBsAg loss showed a less exhausted and more activated phenotype, in line with the increased proliferation following cessation of NA treatment, compared to patients with retained HBsAg.

SECTION

HBV core-specific T cell responses after discontinuation of NA therapy

PARAGRAPH

After analysing the T cell phenotype, we next investigated the effector capacity of HBV-specific T cell responses after in vitro stimulation with core-, polymerase-, or envelope-specific overlapping peptides.

When studying mean T cell responses, stopping treatment resulted in significantly increased HBV core-specific IFN-γ+ as well as MIP-1β+ CD4+ T cell responses after discontinuation of therapy (Fig. 3A, B).

CD4+ T cell responses appeared more augmented after stopping treatment, but the frequency of IFN-γ+ CD8+ T cells was also significantly increased 12 weeks after discontinuation of NA treatment (Fig. 3A, B).

The multi-functionality of core-specific T cells, i.e. cells secreting two or three cytokines simultaneously, was augmented at weeks 8 and 12 after discontinuation of therapy (Fig. 3C).

In contrast to core-specific responses, no significant changes in T cell responses after stopping therapy were observed after stimulation with polymerase- or envelope-specific peptides (Fig. S4A, B).

However, we could not perform the analysis of polymerase- and envelope-specific T cell responses on all patients, because of consumed patient material.

PARAGRAPH

On the individual patient basis, heterogeneous T cell responses were observed, with some patients showing a strong increase in in vitro peptide stimulated T cell response after stopping therapy (Group A in Fig. 4A, B; Fig. S5).

These patients were driving the significant increase of HBV core-specific T cells (Figs. 3 and 4).

In more detail, 9/14 patients at week 4, 10/14 patients at week 8 and 10/14 patients at week 12/48 experienced a threefold increase of IFN-γ+ CD4+ core-specific T cell responses (Fig. 4A, Fig. S5A).

CD8+ T cell responses were similar, with 8/14 patients at week 4, 7/14 patients at week 8, and 10/14 patients at week 12/48 showing a threefold increase in IFN-γ+ CD8+ core-specific T cells (Fig. 4B, Fig. S5B).

However, it needs to be considered that, beside a threefold increase in T cell responses, the absolute numbers of responses were low in some patients and fluctuating responses after stopping therapy were observed.

To present a clear picture, we grouped patients with a strong increase of HBV core-specific T cell responses after discontinuation of therapy into group A and patients with responses of low magnitude or with fluctuating responses into group B (Fig. 4A, B).

For CD4+ T cells five patients and for CD8+ T cells four patients fulfilled the criteria for group A. Representative flow cytometry plots of these patients can be reviewed (Fig. S5).

However, patients that subsequently lost HBsAg (#9, #12, #14) were not the patients with the strongest T cell responses (Fig. 4A, B).

There was no clear correlation of clinical data or HBsAg loss with strength of T cell responses (Fig. 4, Table S2).

However, T cell responses seemed to associate with HBV DNA relapse in most patients (Fig. 4C, D).

Some patients displayed an early increase of immune responses during increasing HBV DNA levels, but at the peak of relapse, the HBV-specific T cell responses diminished (Fig. 4D).

PARAGRAPH

One limitation of our study is that we had only one baseline sample before stopping therapy.

To exclude significant spontaneous fluctuations in T cell responses during NA therapy, we thus longitudinally analysed responses in patients with on-going NA therapy.

As expected, very low levels of IFN-γ+ HBV core-specific T cell responses were detected in these patients and levels were stable over time (Fig. S4C, D).

PARAGRAPH

In summary, structured NA discontinuation resulted in a higher responsiveness to in vitro peptide stimulation of HBV core-specific CD4+ and CD8+ T cells in the peripheral blood of individual patients.

SECTION

PD-L1 blockade further augments HBV-specific T cell responses

PARAGRAPH

Blockade of PD-L1 has been shown to restore HBV-specific T cell responses in vitro10 and could be beneficial when used together with discontinuation of therapy.

Indeed, stimulation with core-specific peptides together with PD-L1 blockade significantly increased CD4+ T cell responses at week 8 and CD8+ T cell responses at baseline, as well as at week 4 and 8 after stopping treatment (Fig. 5A, B).

Like CD4+ T cell responses, additional PD-L1 blockade had the strongest effect on CD8+ T cell responses at week 8 with an at least twofold increase in 47% of patients compared to 29% at baseline and 33% at week 4, respectively (Fig. 5B).

In contrast to polymerase-specific T cell responses (Fig. S6A), additional PD-L1 blocking significantly increased envelope-specific T cell responses 12 weeks after discontinuation of treatment (Fig. S6B).

Comparing mean responses, we observed that the multi-functionality of core-specific T cells was significantly increased at all studied time-points (Fig. 5C).

Interestingly, in two out of three patients that went on to clear HBsAg, we observed a strong effect of PD-L1 blockade on core- (Fig. S6C), envelope- (Fig. S6D), and polymerase-specific (not shown) T cell responses at weeks 12 or 24 after stopping treatment.

For the third patient with HBsAg loss, samples were not available for analysis.

These results are in line with our phenotypic results, where T cells from patients with later HBsAg loss displayed a higher proliferative capacity and an activated phenotype 12-weeks after stopping treatment.

PARAGRAPH

Recently, a restoration of in vitro T cell responses by targeting mitochondrial dysfunction using MitoTempo has been described.14

As PD-L1 blocking can be associated with severe side effects when given as a treatment, we alternatively analysed the effect of MitoTempo in two patients.

Indeed, MitoTempo augmented T cell responses in a similar manner to PD-L1 blocking (Fig. S6E, F).

In summary, the presented results suggest that PD-L1 blocking and the restoration of mitochondrial function can further increase T cell responses after discontinuation of NA therapy.

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

Discontinuation of long-term NA therapy in patients with CHB has lately received attention based on a number of recently published clinical studies that reported higher HBsAg loss rates after stopping NA therapy compared to maintaining NA therapy.5–7

We have shown that discontinuation of NA therapy alters the cytokine milieu.5

suggesting that changes in the immune environment occur after virological relapse.

However, details on cellular immune responses in this setting are still limited.

In our study, we provide evidence that stopping long-term NA therapy leads to changes in T cell phenotype and enhanced responsiveness to in vitro peptide stimulation of HBV-specific T cells.

PARAGRAPH

Strong and multi-specific T cell responses are known to be important for the control and/or clearance of HBV.15–17

However, in patients with CHB, HBV-specific T cell responses are hardly detectable, directed against single epitopes, and display signs of exhaustion.10

Initiation of NA therapy may partially recover T cell responses, especially in patients with HBsAg loss, possibly because of reduced antigenic load.11,12

The patients investigated in the current study had been treated with NAs for at least three years before NA discontinuation.

Importantly, none of the patients showed a significant decline in HBsAg levels during the 48 weeks before stopping therapy.5

We did not observe significant restoration of HBV-specific T cell responses during NA therapy, i.e. when patients were studied before NA discontinuation.

In line with this, the ex vivo T cell phenotype was still markedly altered in patients with CHB on NA therapy compared to healthy individuals.

PARAGRAPH

After stopping long-term NA therapy, only a few T cell specific phenotypic features were altered.

More substantial changes were observed in the functional responses.

The presence of multi-functional T cell responses has been reported to increase the likelihood of controlling an HBV infection.18,19

In this regard, we observed a significant increase in multi-functional HBV core-specific T cell responses after stopping therapy, especially for CD4+ T cells.

Interestingly, core-related antigen (HBcrAg) increased together with viral load.

As HBsAg levels stayed constant during the investigated period, we hypothesise that HBcrAg indicates active replication and may induce core-specific T cell responses.

After discontinuation of NA therapy, core-specific CD4+ T cell responses appeared to be stronger than CD8+ T cell responses, magnitude-wise.

However, it cannot be excluded that we were not able to completely detect all potential CD8+ T cell responses, by stimulating with 15-mer overlapping peptides.20

Envelope- and polymerase-specific responses were not induced to a similar extent.

It is challenging to compare these results with published data, as T cell responses against polymerase and surface are less well studied in patients with CHB in general.

One limitation of our study is that we analysed only one time-point before stopping therapy, so fluctuations of T cell responses during NA therapy cannot be completely excluded.

Thus, as an important control, we analysed HBV-specific responses when patients were on continuous long-term NA therapy, but did not observe significant fluctuations over time.

PARAGRAPH

Although we observed augmented T cell responses after discontinuation of therapy when stimulating the cells in vitro with overlapping peptides, the responses were heterogeneous for individual patients and early retreatment, because of safety concerns, may have limited further induction of immune responses.

However, in some patients, HBV core-specific T cell responses increased during viral rebound, but with increasing HBV DNA and HBcrAg levels, the responses tended to decline in frequency.

Thus, the increase of viral replication after stopping therapy might be a double-edged sword that, on one hand, is able to increase T cell responses in vitro but that also, with persistently high antigen level, may induce T cell exhaustion.10

Such a hypothesis is corroborated by our ex vivo results, where we observed increased levels of PD-1 as well as a decline of T-bet+ and TCF-1+ T cells with increasing antigen load.

Indeed, lack of T-bet expression has previously been associated with CD8+ T cell dysfunction in chronic HBV.21

Induction of these inhibitory pathways might limit the antiviral effect of T cell responses, but may protect against an overwhelming pathological T cell response22 and excessive liver inflammation.23

PARAGRAPH

Although we demonstrate that core-specific T cell responses are increased after discontinuation of therapy, the magnitude of in vitro stimulated HBV-specific T cell responses did not correlate with the subsequent HBsAg decline at week 48.

However, because of the limited number of patients with HBsAg loss, correlations between clinical parameters and T cell responses were not possible to perform.

Thus, we can only speculate that the quantity of in vitro HBV-specific T cell responses is less important than the quality of the response, such as multi-functionality as well as peptide affinity.

Additionally, the reoccurrence of active HBV replication after stopping therapy could partly mimic an acute infection with highly activated T cells not growing in cell culture.

Further, we were not able to study liver-resident T cells.

It could well be that the frequency of HBV-specific intrahepatic T cell responses was high in patients with subsequent HBsAg loss.

Newly infected hepatocytes and a higher amount of viral antigen in the liver after treatment discontinuation might lead to a higher chance that T cells recognise viral antigens being presented (or cross-presented) by major histocompatibility complex molecules.

Further, reoccurrence of HBV replication modifies the cytokine milieu5 and this might in turn affect immune responses in general.

PARAGRAPH

Nevertheless, patients with subsequent HBsAg loss consistently expressed lower levels of the exhaustion markers KLRG1 and PD-1 and presented with an increased frequency of Ki-67+ CD38+ T cells at week 12 after stopping NA treatment.

T cells may not be the only driver of HBsAg decline and HBsAg loss after stopping treatment.

Recently, we showed in the same cohort that natural killer cell cytotoxicity was increased 12 weeks after discontinuation of therapy and correlated with ALT levels, especially in patients with subsequent HBsAg loss.24

However, the immune network is complex and other parts of the immune system should also be considered.

PARAGRAPH

Tan and colleagues were the first to investigate T cell responses after stopping therapy in five patients and detected an increased IFN-γ+ T cell response in one patient without ALT flare.25

This previous report differs from our study, since the majority of the five patients studied were HBeAg-positive.

In line with our findings5 they observed that CXCL-10 and IL-10 were upregulated during ALT flares.

Only recently, Rivino et al. demonstrated that the frequency of HBV-specific T cell responses during NA therapy was higher in patients without flares after stopping therapy and these cells were most commonly found in the PD-1+ T cell compartment.26

PD-1+ expression may preserve HBV-specific CD8+ T cells from overstimulation and deletion and thereby contribute to control of HBV replication and prevent flares after stopping NA therapy.26

We also found a trend that higher PD-1 expression on T cells at baseline was associated with a lower peak of HBV DNA after stopping therapy (Fig. S2D), which is in line with this concept.

However, we observed no association with ALT, but early retreatment of most patients in our study may have prevented hepatic flares.

Conversely, PD-1 expression on T cells was positively correlated with HBsAg levels, suggesting that patients with low HBsAg levels may have less exhausted T cells that might be easier to stimulate after reappearance of antigens.

Of note, all patients with HBsAg loss in our study had low HBsAg levels (<1,000 IU/ml).

PARAGRAPH

The presented results may lay the foundation for new treatment concepts aiming to achieve a functional cure of CHB.

For example, therapeutic vaccinations may be given after stopping NA therapy and not during NA therapy to take advantage of the immune environment after reoccurrence of active HBV replication.

In fact, recent studies showed that therapeutic vaccines given during NA therapy did not prevent relapse after discontinuation of therapy.27,28

Another possibility might be the application of immune checkpoint inhibitors, such as PD-1 and PD-L1 blocking antibodies to be used after, and not during NA therapy as a recent study with a low-dose PD-1 inhibitor during NA therapy did not show any major effects on HBsAg decline in patients while on NA therapy.29

PD-L1 blocking is known to enhance the function of T cells in vitro10 and indeed, in our study in vitro blockade of PD-L1 was more commonly observed after discontinuation of therapy.

However, an uncontrolled immune activation with checkpoint inhibitors may lead to severe immune-mediated adverse events with the risk of liver failure.

As an alternative approach, recent evidence suggests that targeting mitochondrial dysfunction can restore the antiviral function of exhausted HBV-specific CD8+ T cells to a level similar to that of patients with resolved HBV.14

Targeting mitochondrial dysfunction could be a promising strategy to restore exhausted T cells in patients discontinuing NA therapy, as we observed a restoration of HBV core-specific T cell responses that were comparable to the effect of PD-L1 blocking.

PARAGRAPH

In conclusion, we report that structured discontinuation of NA therapy in HBeAg-negative patients with CHB leads to minor alterations in T cell phenotype and a higher responsiveness to in vitro peptide stimulation with HBV core-specific overlapping peptides in several patients.

We hypothesise that relapse of HBV replication could change the cytokine milieu and lead to an increased responsiveness of HBV-specific T cells, which might be interesting for new therapeutic approaches to induce HBsAg decline or loss.

Thus, discontinuation of therapy could be a favourable option for selected patients and may be combined with novel treatment options.

SECTION

Financial support

PARAGRAPH

This study was funded by the German Center for Infection Research (DZIF), the Swedish Research Council, the Swedish Cancer Society, the Swedish Foundation for Strategic Research, the Swedish Society for Medical Research, the Cancer Research Foundations of Radiumhemmet, Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation, the Novo Nordisk Foundation, Åke Wiberg’s Foundation, the Center for Innovative Medicine at Karolinska Institutet, the Stockholm County Council, and the Karolinska Institutet.

SECTION

Conflict of interest

PARAGRAPH

CHzS has received lecture fees from Gilead Sciences, Novartis, MSD and a travel grand from Gliead.

MPM has received fees for lectures, consulting, research grants, and/or board membership from Intercept, Gilead, and Falk Pharma.

HW has received fees for lectures, consulting and research grants from Abbott, Roche Diagnostics, BMS, Gilead, Novatis, Roche, Merck/MSD, Abbvie, Eiger, Falk and Falk Foundation, Siemens, Janssen, MyrmbH, Transgene.

He received honoraria for consulting and research support by companies developing diagnostic tools and antiviral therapies for viral hepatitis B and C. MC has received fees for consulting lectures and/or board membership from Roche, MSD, Gilead, BMS, Janssen, Abbvie, and Roche.

All other authors report no potential conflicts.

PARAGRAPH

Please refer to the accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.

SECTION

Authors’ contributions

PARAGRAPH

FR, CLZ, CHzS, NKB, MC contributed to study concept and design as well as analysis and interpretation of data.

FR, CLZ, and CHzS acquired data.

FR and MC drafted the manuscript.

MC and NKB supervised the study.

All authors contributed to critical revisions and approved the final manuscript.