10.1016/j.jasrep.2018.09.022

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Ceramic production at Selinunte (Sicily) during the 4th and 3rd century BCE: New archaeometric data through the analysis of kiln wastes

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Selinus (or Selinous, modern: Selinunte) is one of the rare “second generation” Sicilian Greek colonies.

It is in fact related to the Greek mother-city Megara Nysaea and its first Sicilian colony Megara Hyblaea, laying the foundation of the sub-colony Heraclea Minoa as well.

Selinunte was the farthest western outpost of the Greek civilization in the central Mediterranean being located on the border of the Phoenico-Punic and the Elymian territories (Fig. 1).

PARAGRAPH

In 480 BCE, the Greek world was threatened by the Persians at east and by the Carthaginians at west.

In that historical frame, Sicily's fate was decided at the Battle of Himera.

In this conflict Selinunte is the only major Greek colony that did not participate to the battle on the Greek side.

The ambiguous neutrality of Selinunte towards the Carthaginians, who were defeated at Himera, did not prevent its destruction in the 409 BCE.

In the following decades several treaties redefined continuously the borders between the Greek and the Punic parts of the island and, finally, the city passed under the Carthaginian control.

During the 4th-3rd century BCE, as soon as the limits of the city were redefined, Selinunte was deeply influenced by both Greek and Punic culture and a prosperity period with rising commercial businesses and craft activities took place (Fresina and Bonanno, 2013; Fourmont, 2014).

PARAGRAPH

The vocation of Selinunte for pottery production roughly dates back to the period of its foundation, as it was recently evidenced by a research of the University of Bonn.

In fact, on the eastern flank of the hill named Manuzza, several bricks, tiles and pottery manufacture structures were found that date back to the beginning of the 6th century BCE (Bentz et al., 2013).

In this relatively small area of the eastern site of the city, extensive geophysical surveys have identified at least 80 kilns for ceramic firing that represent a unique case in Antiquity.

The workshop area of Manuzza, however, no longer produced after the destruction of 409 BCE.

Despite of that, astonishing evidences of pottery making activities for the period following 409 BCE were documented, in the last quarter of the 19th century (Fourmont, 1991, 2005).

In fact, in the part of the excavations of Selinunte named FF1 North, the presence of several potter's workshop producing vessels and terracotta figurines was attested (Fourmont, 1991).

These workshops are particularly relevant as they are fairly well preserved.

In their vicinity, the discovery of many overfired vessels has allowed to know the pottery forms therein produced.

In particular, different types of Punic amphorae were found which represent the first evidence of this production in Selinunte (Fourmont, 2013).

Another unique aspect is the discovery of a kiln even with part of its load still inside and several melted artefacts.

Together with all the pots and the remains of the structure, catapult balls were found inside the kiln, thus dating in an exceptional way the moment when the event should be placed, that is to say 250 BCE, when ‘Carthaginian’ Selinunte fell after the Roman siege during the First Punic War (Fourmont, 2005).

PARAGRAPH

The aim of this paper is to identify the chemical Reference Group/Groups (RG or RGs) and the petrographical fabric/fabrics of the ceramic production of the sector FF1 in Selinunte.

As well established, a RG is defined on the basis of the chemical composition of pottery sampled at kilns and/or kiln waste dumps (Buxeda i Garrigós et al., 2001; Buxeda i Garrigós and Madrid i Fernandez, 2017).

The high fired pottery wastes normally found in kiln dumps offer much higher certainty of local production, therefore they are especially important for the identification of chemical reference groups.

Nevertheless, the chemical reference groups do not relate in a straight line pottery to possible local geological sources for the raw materials employed, as different steps in the processing of the same raw materials and/or firing conditions result in different chemical composition.

Technological processes, on the other hand, are directly related to the functional purposes of the ceramics, since they provide specific physical properties to the final product.

Therefore, when RGs are identified, the researchers have to take into consideration that a pottery workshop may produce artefacts having different functional purposes, even for a limited period of time, thus the raw materials may also have undergone different processing steps and so, that can result in more than one RG for the same kiln/workshop.

Accordingly any eligible ‘reference group’ should be as close as possible to a specific ceramic class or at least macro category (e.g. coarse tableware) and it should possess a relatively low internal variability in terms of chemical composition (Buxeda i Garrigós and Madrid i Fernandez, 2017; Waksman, 2017 and references therein).

A decisive input in this field can be given by the thin-section microscopy technique.

It helps to interpret the concentration values and the variation intervals shown by the chemical elements that compose the ceramic sample (major and trace elements) in light of both mineralogical composition and textural aspects, such as the relative abundance of the aplastic constituents (packing) and their grain-size distribution (Quinn, 2009).

Therefore complementing chemistry with petrography can provide much more information and more accurate results (Montana et al., 2012; Cau Ontiveros et al., 2015; Tsantini et al., 2017).

PARAGRAPH

Starting from this basic consideration, up to 37 samples were carefully selected from a larger number of ceramic production wastes collected at the FF1 kilns throughout stratigraphic excavations.

Afterwards, they underwent petrographic (thin-section petrography) and chemical analyses (combined ICP-OES and ICP-MS) with the aim to establish a valuable RG representative of the ceramic produced at Selinunte during the Punic phase (409–250 BCE).

Very recently the local raw clays (extensively outcropping in the Selinunte's Archaeological Park and its vicinity) were also sampled and characterized by mineralogical and chemical analyses, together with the pre 409 BCE bricks and tiles produced by the kilns of the Manuzza workshop hillside (Montana et al., 2018).

This previous work allowed the definition of the textural and compositional signatures of the ceramic manufactures of the Archaic Selinunte.

In the meantime, it could support a more rigorous control in the institution of the compositional ‘reference group’ of the pottery produced in the FF1 kilns.

The definition of the textural and compositional markers of the daily-use pottery and Punic amphorae produced in the FF1 quarter could be of great interest for establishing regional and supra-regional trade from the 5th to the 3rd century BCE (Bechtold, 2013, 2015a, 2015b).

A comparative evaluation with the data presented in this paper could also give the opportunity to verify for any changes in the Selinunte's manufactures from the Archaic Age to the Hellenistic Age.

The extraordinary persistence of a local ceramic industry makes Selinunte a unique observatory for the study of a long-living local ceramic tradition.

SECTION

The ceramic workshop at the insula FF1 North

PARAGRAPH

The systematic excavation of the block FF1 North on the acropolis of Selinunte allowed the identification of a ceramic production complex of great interest that occupies the space of a residential lot first defined in the early 6th century along with some structures of the 7th BCE (Fig. 2).

The upper archaeological levels of the FF1 block can be dated back to the time of the destruction of Selinunte during the First Punic War (250 BCE).

The set is not fully explored and its northern limit is still unknown (Fourmont, 2012).

One of the stratigraphic units is a pottery production complex called Casa Atelier.

A corridor divides the inner space of this productive framework into two roughly equal parts.

To the east, there is a courtyard where a small circular platform (that very likely kept the potter's wheel) and a rectangular stone basin (water container) were found.

Further to the east a kiln is located, preserved in its lower part, with a praefornium and a circular firing chamber with central pillar of roughly circular shape (grid support).

During the excavation the front part of the grid was found still lying in situ.

Towards the western limit of the courtyard a second, slightly smaller, kiln was discovered.

It has also a circular shape with the praefornium partly cut by the foundation trench of a medieval house (Fig. 3A).

Fortunately, the exploration of this second kiln provided important information due to the pottery fillings still preserved in situ and for an even rarer discovery.

In fact, while the kiln was operating, it was destroyed by catapult balls that caused the collapse of the structure, and the vessels felt into the firing chamber were overfired and partially melted (Fig. 3B, C, D).

This allowed preserving direct testimonies of the achromatic common wares used in Selinunte such as lekane (basins), jugs, cups, and large diameter funnels (Fig. 4).

The whole production complex of the Casa atelier was connected through an opening and a corridor to the architectural structure located at the corner of the FF1 road along the great North-South axis, thus confirming a relationship between the activity of the potters and the shops for the sale opened at the angle of the main road.

At around 20 m northwest from this latter a third kiln was discovered.

It was almost empty, although the large dispersion of overfired waste area and in its surroundings clearly indicates the type of ceramics it might have been produced.

It is important to stress out that the ceramic kilns discovered in the other large production area at Manuzza, active before the first destruction of Selinunte in the 409 BCE, were completely empty.

SECTION

Materials and methods

PARAGRAPH

The samples for the petrographic and chemical analysis were carefully selected from kilns 2 and 3, located inside the FF1 block (Table 1).

Twenty-nine ceramic specimens are common and tableware, used in daily household, and one is the lid of a Punic transport amphora (code F3-17 in Table 1).

In addition, overfired clay samples from the firing grid of kiln 2 (code F2-1 in Table 1) and the central pillar of kiln 3 (code F3-6 in Table 1) were collected, as well as several molten clay drippings from the waste deposits of kiln 3.

This latter series, composed of eight samples, was considered in order to complete the chemical dataset concerning locally available clayey materials, recently studied in detail (Montana et al., 2018).

The fact that the ceramic content of the F2 kiln represents a single batch can be considered a further archeologically interesting aspect.

Moreover, a petrographic and chemical comparison was made with the bricks/tiles produced locally before the 409 BCE (by the Archaic kilns located in the Cottone river valley) and the raw clay materials available in the same area in order to verify the chemical similarity with the productions of the FF1 block.

PARAGRAPH

Thin-section microscopy was carried out on all the ceramic samples with a Leica DC 200 polarizing microscope equipped with a digital camera.

The relative abundance of non-plastic inclusions (modal mineralogy expressed as area %) was determined by conventional point-counting procedures (Matthew, 1991).

PARAGRAPH

Bulk chemical data were determined at Activation Laboratories Ltd. (Ontario, Canada), using the fusion inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) technique for major oxides and inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) for trace elements.

Samples were first air-dried, ground and homogenized in a planetary agate ball-mill (Retsch PM100).

Samples were prepared and analysed in a batch system.

Each batch contains a method reagent blank, certified reference materials and some replicates.

Samples were mixed with a flux of lithium metaborate and lithium tetraborate and fused in an induction furnace.

The molten melt is immediately poured into a solution of 5% nitric acid containing an internal standard until completely dissolved.

The samples were run for major oxides and selected trace elements on a combination simultaneous/sequential Thermo Jarrell-Ash ENVIRO II ICP or a Varian Vista 735 ICP.

Calibration is performed using 7 prepared USGS and CANMET certified reference materials.

One of the 7 standards is used during the analysis for every group of ten samples.

Twenty-four elements were considered (with detection limits in brackets): Na (0.01), Mg (0.01), Al (0.01), Si (0.01), P (0.01), K (0.01), Ca (0.01), Ti (0.001), Mn (0.001) and Fe (0.01) (given as oxides, mass%) and Cr (20), V (5), Cu (10), Zn (30), Rb (2), Sr (2), Y (1), Zr (2), Ba (2), Pb (5), Ce (0.1), Nb (1), La (0.1) and Ni (20) (ppm).

The results were recalculated on LOI-free basis.

The data deriving from the chemical analysis were submitted to statistical treatment in order to quantify the variance levels and, overall, to verify the compositional homogeneity of the ceramic products selected for the definition of the ‘reference group’.

To this end, Variation Matrix and Principal Component Analysis were performed (S-Plus 2000, MathSoft, 2000).

SECTION

Results and discussion

SECTION

Petrography

PARAGRAPH

The results of the petrographic study of the 29 ceramic samples selected from the materials found in the aforementioned kilns inside the FF1 area are schematically resumed in Table 2.

At first sight it can be stated that the most representative forms of daily-use coarse ware have very similar features regarding to the grain-size distribution, relative abundance and mineralogical composition of aplastic inclusions.

Concerning the textural aspects, all the samples, regardless of their specific function of use, show serial sorting and aplastic relative abundance (packing) ranging between 15 and 25% area, with a remarkable predominance of coarse silt (0.04–0.06 mm), very fine sand (0.06–0.125 mm) and fine sand (0.125–0.25 mm) fractions.

On the other hand, grain sizes ranging from the upper limit of the fine sand (0.25 mm) to the one of medium sand (0.5 mm) are sporadic to common, while the inclusions with average diameter >0.5 mm are rare or absent (Fig. 5A).

The aplastic inclusions are most frequently angular to subangular.

Only the inclusions with greater diameter than 0.3 mm are subrounded to rounded.

Taking into account the mineralogical/lithological composition, monocrystalline quartz appears to be by far the most abundant aplastic component (Fig. 5B).

Bioclasts and calcareous lithic fragments are common constituents (Fig. 5C).

Considering that the firing process has completely decomposed most of these calcareous particles, for the estimation of their original abundance in the ceramic paste, the ‘micritic clots’ formed by secondary microcrystalline calcite (Cau Ontiveros et al., 2002) and pore casts having sub-regular (approximately rounded) or irregular shape should be also considered.

Polycrystalline quartz and feldspars (K-feldspar and less frequently plagioclase) are common components.

Most often the slightly altered feldspar crystals appear under incipient argilization state.

Noticeably subordinate or trace aplastic constituents are chert grains, sandstones and quartz-feldspars-mica bearing acidic rock fragments (Fig. 5D).

Tiny white mica flakes (mainly 0.04–0.1 mm) are somewhat subordinate as well and quite homogeneously distributed in the ceramic body.

The groundmass of all the studied samples is optically isotropic at least.

It is characterized by clay lumps to some extent and only moderately impregnated by secondary microcrystalline calcite developed during the burial phase.

Several samples experienced the formation of a glassy phase in the outermost part of the rim as evidence of reaching too high temperatures (Fig. 5E–F).

SECTION

Chemistry

PARAGRAPH

The results of the chemical analyses of the twenty-nine analysed ceramic fragments belonging to recognized with well known forms are shown in Table 3A.

In Table 3B, on the other hand, the results of other eight samples from the kilns' structure (firing plane, central pillar, molten clay drippings) are presented.

The concentrations of the major elements reported in both tables are recalculated to 100% on dry (LOI)-free basis, that represents the total mass of moisture and volatile materials composing the sample, in general consisting of adsorbed water, structural water and carbon dioxide deriving from carbonates.

LOI values have also been reported in the cited tables.

Major elements concentrations (n = 10) are expressed as mass% of the corresponding oxides, while trace elements (n = 14) are expressed in parts per million (ppm).

PARAGRAPH

The chemical composition of samples (Table 3A) is in good agreement with the results of thin-section microscopy.

They show a very similar overall chemical composition.

The SiO2 concentrations are between 58 and 64 mass% (mean value = 60.67 mass%), while the CaO concentrations range between 10 and 14 mass% (mean value = 13.21 mass%).

The average mass percentage of Fe2O3 is 5.62, which appears to be slightly lower compared the already analysed raw clays used for pottery production in western Sicily (Montana et al., 2011).

The concentrations of the other elements are absolutely compatible with the mineralogical composition and the proportions of the aplastic inclusions (monomineralic grains and rock fragments).

The MgO percentage (on average 1.89 mass%) is relatively low and reflects the small quantities or absence of magnesium carbonates, femic minerals and opaque oxides in the studied ceramic pastes.

Equally, the regular concentrations of K2O (mean 2.35 mass%) derive from the relatively small amounts of silt-sized flakes of white mica dispersed in the groundmass and from the common K-feldspar grains.

Finally, Al2O3 (mean value = 14.40 mass%) and Na2O (mean value = 0.81 mass%) percentages are compatible with the Sicilian clayey ceramic raw materials.

It should be emphasized that the great majority of the major elements shows low relative standard deviations (RDS = 100 ∗ s/|x̄|), well below 10% (Fe2O3, MgO, CaO, K2O) and sometimes even lower than 5% (SiO2, Al2O3, TiO2).

The only exceptions are Na2O and P2O5 since both exceed the 10%.

The variation of the concentration of these two oxides, however, could have been conditioned by random contaminations during the burial phase.

PARAGRAPH

Considering the abundances of the trace elements in the 29 ceramic samples, the values shown in Table 3A confirm the use of a clayey raw material free of particular mineralogical markers.

This statement well applies to the concentration ranges of Rb, Ba and Sr that seem to be well correlated with the abundances of the geochemically related major constituents (K and Ca respectively).

The same considerations can be made for V and the other transition metals (geochemically related to Fe and Mn but also to the relative abundance of clay minerals in the groundmass in the corresponding ceramic paste), as well as for the light rare earth elements (La and Ce) and the other incompatible elements (Zr, Y, Nb).

Pb also does not show particularly high concentrations (mean value = 30 ppm).

The calculated RDS for the considered trace elements is always within the 20%, that is a value more than acceptable for most of the trace elements.

In some cases (V, Sr, Y, Rb) RDS is even <10%.

PARAGRAPH

Concerning the mean chemical composition of the samples coming from the firing grid, central pillar and the overfired or melted clay drippings (Table 3B), it shows clear relation with the composition of the ceramic assemblage.

The only exception is the concentration of copper, since its average value is three times higher in the sampled building elements of the kilns that in the rest of the material.

It suggests that the repeated exposure of the firing grid and central pillar to high temperatures or the melting of the groundmass of the ceramic waste, does not lead to significant changes of the overall chemical composition.

Moreover, potters used the same raw material to produce the kilns' building elements and the pottery itself.

Also the LOI values are relatively low and well comparable between the two series of samples, confirming that the mass loss measured during the LOI testing at 1000 °C should mainly derive from the decomposition of the small amount of secondary calcite precipitated during the long burial phase.

PARAGRAPH

To start with the statistical treatment of the chemical data, first the degree of variability in the data set was evaluated, since it helps to define the monogenic or polygenic character of the set, that is to say, to see if a single or more than one chemical group can be identified in the data (Buxeda i Garrigós and Kilikoglou, 2003).

The Compositional Variation Matrix (CVM) was calculated on the following sub-composition: SiO2, Al2O3, Fe2O3, MnO, MgO, CaO, Na2O, K2O, TiO2, V, Ba, Sr, Y, Zr, Cr, Ni, Cu, Zn, Rb, Nb, La, and Ce.

P2O5 and Pb weren't taken into account, because they are susceptible to post-depositional alterations and/or contamination that introduce perturbations in the data set (Buxeda i Garrigós, 1999).

The total chemical variability (υt) for the 29 individuals is equal to 0.22 (Table 4).

This relatively low value points to a general chemical homogeneity of the data, their monogenic character and the existence of a single production.

That also agrees quite well with the petrographic results.

PARAGRAPH

To further explore the data, the Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was performed, employing the additive logratio transformation (taking into account the considerations of Aitchison, 1986 and Buxeda i Garrigós, 1999) that was done on the following sub composition: SiO2, Al2O3, Fe2O3, MgO, CaO, Na2O, K2O, TiO2, Cr, V, Cu, Zn, Rb, Sr, Y, Zr, Ba, Ce, Nb, La and Ni.

Yttrium was used as a divisor because it introduces less variability to the data set according to the CVM.

The results corroborate one more a general chemical homogeneity of the analysed pottery samples from the kilns F2 and F3 (Fig. 6).

SECTION

Compositional comparison among the local raw materials and local ceramic productions: establishing the chemical ‘reference group’ of the post 409 BCE productions

PARAGRAPH

In this section, again with the aim of verifying the congruity of the set of studied ceramic samples to be considered as ‘compositional reference group’ for the FF1 kilns, a petrographic and chemical comparison has been made with the bricks/tiles produced locally before the 409 BCE (by the Archaic kilns located in the Cottone river valley) and the raw clay materials available in the same area.

PARAGRAPH

Both bricks/tiles and local clayey raw materials (after experimental firing-tests) were the topic of a recent archaeometric study that ascertained their textural and compositional features concerning the aplastic inclusions and the groundmass (Montana et al., 2018).

Thin-section analysis of the locally produced tiles and bricks has permitted to estimate that the relative abundance of non-plastic components ranges between 10 and 20% area, with the most part of grains falling in the classes of coarse silt (0.04–0.06 mm) and very fine sand (0.06–0.125 mm).

Quartz was found to be the most abundant constituent.

Bioclasts and calcareous lithic fragments are equally common constituents, however, being frequently decomposed after the firing process and replaced by ‘micritic clots’ (Cau Ontiveros et al., 2002) and/or pore casts.

Polycrystalline quartz, feldspars (both K-feldspar and plagioclase), chert and quartz arenite fragments and mica laths are only sporadic or even rare constituents (Fig. 7A and B).

After the petrographic comparison we observed that the early ceramic productions of the kilns located in the Cottone valley exhibit very similar textural and mineralogical characteristics with the pottery manufactured by the kilns sited in the FF1 insula (Table 2 and Fig. 7C).

This fact would lead us to think that the same local clayey materials (i.e. sedimentary deposits of the Pleistocene and/or alluvial deposits deriving from them according to Montana et al., 2018) were also used in the Punic Selinunte without significant discrepancy in the production cycle.

Small variations in the quantity (packing % area) or quality (i.e. quartz/bioclasts relative abundance) of the aplastic inclusions could be considered as indicative of different points of raw clay supply within the same geological deposit and even in the same area.

PARAGRAPH

A quite satisfactory chemical similarity is also attested between the brick and tiles produced in the Archaic kilns in the Cottone valley, the local raw clays and the set of common ware wastes of kilns F2 and F3 at the FF1 insula.

Fig. 8A illustrates the variation intervals and the mean values of Al2O3, Fe2O3, MgO, K2O, which are very similar, while the values of SiO2 and CaO show slightly less similarity.

In order to evaluate this result, it should be noted that the average contents of SiO2 and CaO (elements with higher intra-source variability) for both categories of finished ceramic products are rather overlapping, but they slightly differ from the values found in clay raw materials (especially for the SiO2 content).

The petrographic observations clearly explain that difference.

They show a slightly higher content of aplastic inclusions in the ceramic pastes compared with the experimentally fired raw clays.

That suggests the possibility that well-graded quartz-rich sand (mainly medium-fine in size) might have been used as temper for pottery manufacture as well as for brick and tiles production.

Montana et al. (2018) have reported the presence of sandy dunes as a potential supply point, especially near the mouth of the River Modione (not far from the Sanctuary of Malophoros).

Alternatively, it is also reasonable to think that the exact raw materials (clay-rich geological deposits) supply points were not the investigated ones, having a common geological character but a natural variability in the sandy component.

The correspondence of the variation intervals and the average concentration values of the trace elements match very well (Fig. 8B and C).

The concentration of the trace elements in this specific case is more influenced by the groundmass rather than by the non-plastic inclusions (since there is absence of specific mineralogical markers, i.e. volcanic or metamorphic minerals/rock fragments).

The only exception is Cu mass%, which is considerably higher for the structural elements of the furnace (firing grid and pillars) and the molten clay drippings (Tables 1 and 3).

This might be the result of the tendency of Cu itself to segregate in the glassy phase or to an accidental contamination of the archaeological findings inside the kiln, perhaps due to occasional use different from the ceramic production (i.e. melting of metals and/or glass).

PARAGRAPH

A satisfactorily low ‘within variance’ concerning the group of 29 ceramic samples (wastes) selected from the kilns F2 and F3 of the insula FF1 has been attested.

Moreover, a good compositional congruence has been verified with more ancient ceramic productions and local clay raw materials.

Consequently, all the analysed common wares may be considered as one single production and the chemical compatibility between them and the clays reinforces that hypothesis.

The ‘chemical reference group’ mean composition of the 24 analysed chemical elements and standard deviation in each element of the common ware production of Selinunte, between 409 BCE and 250 BCE, is presented in Table 5.

SECTION

Conclusions

PARAGRAPH

The production area of the insula FF1, located in the south west part of the acropolis of Selinunte, certainly represents an exemplary case for establishing the textural and compositional characteristic features of the ceramic production during the Punic period of the settlement.

The stratigraphic studies on the entire FF1 area, as well as on the production facilities (Fourmont, 1991, 2005), together with the exceptional condition of ceramic wastes, especially for kiln F2, made possible to select highly representative assemblage of samples for the archaeometric study and the definition of a reliable ‘compositional reference group’.

This condition of work has also took advantages by the recently acquired archaeometric data concerning both the clayey raw materials available in the territory immediately surrounding the site (Montana et al., 2018) and the ceramic productions (down to 409 BCE) of the Archaic furnaces already brought to light by the excavation mission led by the University of Bonn in the Cottone River valley (Bentz et al., 2013).

As a result, the Pleistocene clayey deposits outcropping just outside the fortification were established to be the raw materials used by the potters of ancient Selinous.

PARAGRAPH

The petrographic and chemical analyses discussed in this paper allowed to state that the ceramic manufactures of two of the 4 furnaces operating in the FF1 insula have rather homogeneous textural/compositional characteristics for the definition of a single ‘reference group’.

The daily-use common ware here produced is characterized by aplastic inclusions (whose relative abundance ranges between 15 and 25% area) mainly composed of monocrystalline quartz and subordinately of calcareous bioclasts, falling in the size classes of coarse silt and medium sand (0.04–0.5 mm).

Grains larger than 0.5 mm are sporadic to rare.

Polycrystalline quartz, K-feldspar, plagioclase, chert, sandstones and quartz-feldspars-mica acid rock fragments are the accessory constituents.

The low total chemical variability (υt = 0.22) of the studied ceramic set calculated from the chemical composition data reflects in all respects the specific incidence of the above mentioned mineralogical and textural features, clearly identified in local raw materials and in Archaic ceramic productions by Montana et al. (2018).

The only cause of variability in the ceramic paste would seem likely to derive from the occasional tempering of local clay with medium-fine grained sand exploited for this purpose from the coastal dunes (especially from the area not far from the Sanctuary of Malophoros).

The variable amount of quartz-rich sand added to the clayey material (tempering), which in turn is characterized by its own sandy fraction, produces a relatively larger variation in the SiO2/CaO concentration ratio if compared to the local clays at their natural state.

The simultaneous use of petrographic and chemical techniques and also the complete characterization of local raw materials hold up this hypothesis, even after the experimental firing routines.

Nonetheless, the chemical ‘reference group’ defined through this study seems to be robust, characterized by acceptable low standard deviations for the most significant markers and fully congruent with the geo-lithologic context of the area.

PARAGRAPH

This work represents a significant step towards the knowledge of pottery production from 4th to mid-3rd century BCE at Selinus, and gives a much better definition of the local ceramic industry during the Punic period.

The new chemical ‘reference group’ might be used for future studies that aim to define the trade networks in that time in southwestern Sicily.

It represents a good starting point for a series of systematic studies concerning specific ceramics classes (i.e. tableware, cooking ware, transport amphorae, etc.) that will take into account the consumption and trade dynamics of the ceramic objects produced in the Punic Selinunte towards many insular and extra insular frameworks.