10.1016/j.jhep.2018.01.022

ABSTRACT

TITLE

Intra-arterial idarubicin_lipiodol without embolisation in hepatocellular carcinoma: The LIDA-B phase I trial

PARAGRAPH

Idarubicin shows high cytotoxicity against hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells, a high hepatic extraction ratio, and high lipophilicity leading to stable emulsions with lipiodol.

A dose-escalation phase I trial of idarubicin_lipiodol (without embolisation) was conducted in patients with cirrhotic HCC to estimate the maximum-tolerated dose (MTD) and to assess the safety, efficacy, and pharmacokinetics of the drug, and the health-related quality of life achieved by patients.

PARAGRAPH

Patients underwent two sessions of treatment with a transarterial idarubicin_lipiodol emulsion without embolisation.

The idarubicin dose was escalated according to a modified continuous reassessment method.

The MTD was defined as the dose closest to that causing dose-limiting toxicity (DLT) in 20% of patients.

PARAGRAPH

A group of 15 patients were enrolled, including one patient at 10 mg, four patients at 15 mg, seven patients at 20 mg, and three patients at 25 mg.

Only two patients experienced DLT: oedematous ascitic decompensation and abdominal pain at 20 and 25 mg, respectively.

The calculated MTD of idarubicin was 20 mg.

The most frequent grade ≥3 adverse events were biological.

One month after the second session, the objective response rate was 29% (complete response, 0%; partial response, 29%) based on modified Response Evaluation Criteria In Solid Tumours.

The median time to progression was 5.4 months [95% confidence limit (CI) 3.0–14.6 months] and median overall survival was 20.6 months (95% CI 5.7–28.7 months).

Pharmacokinetic analysis of idarubicin showed that the mean Cmax of idarubicin after intra-arterial injection of the idarubicin-lipiodol emulsion is approximately half the Cmax after intravenous administration.

Health-related quality of life results confirmed the good safety results associated with use of the drug.

PARAGRAPH

The MTD of idarubicin was 20 mg after two chemolipiodolisation sessions.

Encouraging safety results, and patient responses and survival were observed.

A phase II trial has been scheduled.

