10.1016/j.jasrep.2018.10.010

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Punic black-gloss ware in Nora (south-western Sardinia, Italy): Production and provenance

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Punic black-gloss ware, dating to the Hellenistic Age, is a ceramic class extensively found in the whole Punic (referred to the culture of Carthage) area as well as in those under the Punic influence.

The development of this ceramic class finds its origins in the need of counteracting the decrease of tableware caused by the progressive downfall of the exports of Attic pottery, between the end of the IV century and the first half of the II century BCE.

The term Punic refers to all local productions, the production techniques and shapes related both to the knowledge inherent to the Punic cultural substratum and to different external influences, initially from the Greeks and then from the Italics.

PARAGRAPH

In the western Mediterranean, Punic black-gloss wares are attested, in addition to the northern African regions (in the modern Morocco and Tunisia), also in southern Spain and Italy (Morel, 1963, 1986; Lancel, 1987; Chelbi, 1992; Castanyer et al., 1993; Righini Cantelli, 1983; Tronchetti, 2001, 2014; Del Vais, 2000; Michetti, 2007; De Luca, 2017; Bechtold et al., 1999).

In this latter, it is attested especially in the Tyrrhenian islands, particularly in southern Sardinia, Sicily, Aeolian Islands and Ischia (Fig. 1).

Since the sixties of the last century, this ceramic class has been identified in Sardinia (Morel, 1963) and has been then defined as “ceramique punique á vernis noir” (Morel, 1986); the documents were characterised by “original” features and considered “often of high quality”, reflecting a Hellenistic repertoire and representing an imitation of the widely distributed and highly appreciated black-gloss ware of Greek production (Morel, 1986).

PARAGRAPH

Within the recent excavation of the so called “Roman Temple” in the ancient settlement of Nora (Pula, south-western coast of Sardinia, Italy), a significant amount of black-gloss pottery sherds was found.

The town was inhabited since the second half of the VIII century BCE, when Phoenician merchants used the small headland for their seasonal stays; developed into an urban settlement after the aggressive Carthaginian strategies at the end of the VI century BCE, Nora became eventually a medium-size town in the Roman Age after the constitution of the Provincia Sardiniae et Corsicae in 227 BCE (Bonetto and Ghiotto, 2013).

PARAGRAPH

The black-gloss ware sherds recovered from the deep and continuous stratigraphy of the so called "Roman Temple", share quite a few common features under a macroscopic and morphological viewpoints: they have a quite pliable ceramic body and a non-uniform, blackish glaze (Fig. 2a).

The main shapes of Punic black-gloss ware attested at Nora are small cups, bowls and plates (Fig. 2b) belonging to the Morel type 2600 (Morel, 1986).

PARAGRAPH

The artefacts distinctive traits has been identified through a comparative study with other attestations in both Sardinian (Righini Cantelli, 1983; Tronchetti, 2001; Del Vais, 2007; Del Vais, 2014) and Mediterranean sites (Morel, 1983; Lancel, 1987; Chelbi, 1992; Castanyer et al., 1993; Giardino, 2013); this analysis indicates that the black-gloss ceramics vessels of Nora were not isolated productions of low technical quality, but part of a quite extensive production (Morel, 1986; Michetti, 2007).

The analysed material, coming from a secondary context, was selected according to formal, chronological and typological characteristics, as well as macroscopic features of the ceramic body.

The study of a group of twenty potsherds of this ceramic class found at Nora (Table 1), was carried out to define the provenance, identifying possible local imitations, as well as to detect its production technology.

This information has been here considered in a wider frame, trying to perform a critical revision of the published archaeological and archaeometric data and aiming at contributing to draw a picture of the spreading phenomenon of the Punic black-gloss ceramics in the Hellenistic Mediterranean basin.

SECTION

Materials and methods

PARAGRAPH

A set of twenty samples of black-gloss ware was analysed according to a multianalytical approach, consisting in the petrographic analysis by polarised light microscopy (OM), mineralogical analysis by X-ray powder diffraction (XRPD), and chemical analysis by X-ray fluorescence (XRF).

Most of the sherds were thin-sectioned and microscopically analysed, following the procedure described by Whitbread (1989, 1995) and revised by Quinn (2013).

Samples were divided into petrographic groups according to type, abundance, and grain-size of inclusions.

PARAGRAPH

X-ray powder diffraction data were recorded for all samples on a Philips PW3710 diffractometer in Bragg-Brentano geometry, equipped with a Co X-ray tube, operating at 40 kV and 40 mA in the 4°-70° 2θ range, with step-size 0.02° and counting time 1 s per step.

The XRPD data were then statistically treated with the hierarchical cluster analysis tool of X'Pert HighScore Plus® software (PANalytical) according to the procedure described by Piovesan et al. (2013) for analysis of mortars and by Maritan et al. (2015) for that of pottery, in order to obtain homogeneous groups with analogous mineralogical compositions in terms of the nature and relative abundance of mineral phases.

Samples of each cluster may represent production obtained with the same base-clay or recipes and similar firing conditions (temperature and firing atmosphere) (Maritan et al., 2015; Baklouti et al., 2016; Tenconi et al., 2017; Baklouti et al., 2018).

Quantitative chemical analyses of major, minor (SiO2, TiO2, Al2O3, Fe2O3, MnO, MgO, CaO, Na2O, K2O, P2O5) and trace elements (Sc, V, Cr, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn, Ga, Rb, Sr, Y, Zr, Nb, Ba, La, Ce, Nd, Pb, Th, U) were performed by X-ray fluorescence (XRF) on a Philips PW2400 spectrometer, in order to define the chemical variability of black-gloss ware.

Potsherds were reduced to powder in an agate mortar, after removal of the external surfaces to avoid any contamination, and then prepared as beads from calcined powder and Li2B4O7, dilution ratio 1:10.

Chemical data were statistically processed with standard tools, such as Principal Component Analysis (PCA), cluster analysis (CA), using Statgraphics® Centurion XVI software package.

The R Project for Statistical Computing was used to explore the compositional variation matrix, according to the method of Buxeda i Garrigós (1999) to evaluate any contamination.

Multivariate analyses were therefore carried out on a subset of elements, excluding those with a high ratio between total variation (vt) and variance (τ.i.).

Raw data were standardised according to the procedures of Vitali and Franklin (1986) and Baxter (1999, 2006) by log-transformation, in order to avoid misclassifications due to the differing orders of magnitude and ranges of variables (Fermo et al., 2008) and also to avoid the constant sum problem (Aquilia et al., 2015).

Some of the samples were also microstructurally analysed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) using a CamScan MX 2500 microscope.

PARAGRAPH

Black-gloss ware from Nora was compared with a series of clay materials sampled from the surroundings of Cagliari and Nora, and specifically from the localities of S. Gilla, Fangario, Su Gunventeddu and Canale Saliu.

After having sieved these materials, eliminating the coarse sand-sized fraction, obtaining a clayey material with a grain-size comparable to that of the black-gloss ware, a series of briquettes were produced by firing them.

These were then thin-sectioned and petrographically compared with the black-gloss ware to define possible analogies with local clay materials.

SECTION

Results

PARAGRAPH

On the basis of the minero-petrographic composition of the inclusions, the studied black-gloss ware can be divided into two main petro-groups:

quartz-rich paste: this paste was observed in six potsherds (samples 4194, 4378, 4598, 5390, 5973, 7753) in which abundant inclusions (coarse:fine c:f ratio ~ 30:70) are represented by rounded fragments of quartz, both as single crystals and polycrystalline aggregates of metamorphic origin, up to 300 μm in size, showing mainly unimodal grain-size distribution.

They have a single-space related distribution and are embedded into an optically inactive groundmass.

Only in some cases (i.e.: sample 4378, 4598), large inclusions have a grain-size gap with the finer silt-size ones.

Quartz is associated to rare plagioclase and K-feldspar crystals, fragments of carbonate rocks which decomposed and reacted with the surrounding argillaceous groundmass during firing, and opaque minerals (Fig. 3a).

quartz and foraminifer-rich paste: fourteen potsherds (samples 2175, 2854, 3726, 3773, 4251, 4474, 4499, 4857, 5082, 5545, 7034, 7120, 7157, 7442) are characterised by an optically inactive groundmass in which remnants of foraminifer shells occur among the inclusions (Fig. 3b).

Analogously to the previous petro-group, inclusions are quite abundant, having a c:f ratio ~ 25:75 and showing a continuous grain-size distribution with maximum dimension around 200 μm.

In addition to foraminifer shells, abundant angular crystals of quartz, associated to subordinate crystals of feldspar, white and dark mica flakes and opaque minerals are also present.

PARAGRAPH

On the basis of the chemical composition (Table 2), it is clear that the black-gloss ware found in Nora were produced using a Ca-rich clay (18–19%) with few exceptions (i.e. 4194, 4857,5082, 7442) in which CaO content is lower (<16%).

The statistical treatment of the chemical data was carried out excluding the concentration of P2O5, an oxide commonly considered good indicator of the alteration processes that can take place during burial (Freestone, 2001; Lemoine and Picon, 1982; Maritan and Mazzoli, 2004; Maritan et al., 2009).

Indeed, this element showed high ratio between total variation (vt) and variance (τ.i.)

as calculated by the variation matrix, according to the method of Buxeda i Garrigós (1999).

The cluster analysis shows that all samples group in two distinct clusters, one (cluster 1) including all the potsherds characterised by a quartz and foraminifer-rich paste, and the other one (cluster 2) embracing those rich in quartz inclusions (Fig. 4).

The potsherd with the lowest CaO content (4194) shows a high dissimilarity level with respect to all the other five potsherds of this group.

The discrimination between the two clusters is mainly determined by the higher content in alkali of the samples rich in foraminifer shells (Fig. 5), while those rich in quartz inclusions are characterised by slightly higher content of CaO, as well as in Fe2O3, as indicated also in the score and loading plot of the PCA analysis.

This suggests the use of a clayey material richer in carbonate and iron oxides for the production of potsherds with a quartz-rich paste.

Potsherds rich in foraminifer shells contain more Na2O and K2O, therefore more alkali-bearing minerals, in particular feldspars (both K-feldspar and albite-rich plagioclase) and muscovite/illite.

PARAGRAPH

This clear cut between the potsherds rich in quartz and those rich in foraminifer shells is confirmed also by their mineralogical composition.

The dendrogram of the cluster analysis of the XRPD data (Fig. 6a) shows that samples with a quartz-rich paste tend to group together (CL1).

Mineralogically, they are composed of quartz, calcite, gehlenite, fassaite, plagioclase and hematite, sample 5390 resulting the most representative from the cluster of the XRPD patterns (Fig. 6b).

Potsherd 4194 differs from the others of this ceramic paste, since it does not contain calcite.

The microstructural analysis of this ceramic paste shows that the groundmass is characterised by extensive vitrification, with pervasive bridging due to amorphisation and partial melting of clay minerals (Fig. 7a, b).

Moreover, pores tend to be rounded (vesicles) and confined by the amorphous micromass, although porosity is only partially closed.

PARAGRAPH

Most of the potsherds of quartz and foraminifer-rich paste group in CL2 (Fig. 6a) and result to be formed by abundant quartz, associated to calcite, gehlenite, fassaite, plagioclase, hematite and illite/muscovite (see XRPD pattern of the representative potsherd of this cluster, 3726 in Fig. 6b).

Four samples of this petro-group differ for their high content in amorphous phase (expressed by the higher background hump between 30° and 45° 2 Theta in potsherd 7442), gehlenite (sample 5082), calcite (sample 7157) or calcite and gehlenite (sample 3773), as a consequence of slightly different firing conditions.

Under a microstructural viewpoint, the groundmass is less vitrified than in the quartz-rich potsherds, clay-mineral flakes are still well preserved and porosity is open and characterised by irregular shapes (mainly vughs and channels).

Moreover, foraminifer shells have a very porous structures (Fig. 7c), in some cases also showing reaction rims (Fig. 7d), indicating that they underwent decomposition, recrystallization and reaction with the surrounding groundmass.

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

In the last couple of decades, a series of archaeometric studies have been carried out on Archaic Phoenician and Punic pottery found in central and western Mediterranean (Amadori et al., 1995, 1996, 2002, 2006, 2009, 2017; Amadori and Fabbri, 1998a, 1998b, 1998c; Fabbri et al., 1998; Capelli, 2003; Maraoui Telmini and Bouhlel, 2011).

Thanks to all the data produced from these authors, it is here possible to make a statistically supported comparison with possible provenance areas for the two classes observed at Nora.

On the basis of the petrographic features, potsherd rich in quartz inclusions may derive from northern Africa production centres, such as those of Carthage, for the occurrence of the characteristic rounded quartz inclusions (Maraoui Telmini and Bouhlel, 2011), typical of this geographic region.

Although Neogene and Quaternary alluvial deposits form different Italian regions may contain rounded clasts of quartz, the predominance of this type of grains in the silt and sand grain-size fractions of the quartz-rich paste indicates an origin different from the Italian peninsula and consistent with the northern African area (see also Capelli, 2003).

Instead, the presence of foraminifer shells in the other paste cannot univocally constrain the possible provenance on a petrographic base, since most of the published archaeometric studies on Punic pottery reports only chemical data.

Despite Capelli (2003) described the occurrence of calcareous microfossils for one potsherd from Nora, attributed to a North-Africa or Syria-Palestine region, the lack of rounded quartz inclusions in the potsherds found at Nora and here studied, characterised by the occurrence of foraminifer (quartz and foraminifer-rich paste) excludes a common origin with that analysed by Capelli (2003).

Although representing a different ceramic class with a coarse paste produced in the Late Roman Times, the cooking ware from Nora, attested to be locally produced (Bassoli et al., 2010), is petrographically very different from the black-gloss ware here studied, even for its finer inclusions composition.

This data support furthermore the hypothesis of a not local production.

This is also supported by the very different chemical analysis, which indicate that the coarse ceramic ware was produced using a calcium-poor clay (CaO: average 2.4%, standard deviation: 1.17%); the black-gloss ware was on contrary produced with a calcium-rich clay in both the two pastes here defined (Table 2).

PARAGRAPH

The petrographic comparison with the clayey materials collected in the area of Nora and adequately sieved, indicates that the sampled clayey materials are characterised by a very different petrographic composition in terms of inclusions composition and features of the micromass.

They contain abundant angular fragments of both magmatic (granite and basalt) and sedimentary rocks (siltstone and sandstone) not present (or not in such quantity) in the potsherds, as well as minerals, such as abundant feldspar and biotite, and the micromass is low in calcium.

The occurrence of these inclusions are related to the geology of the area near Nora, where alkaline granitoids, andesite, and metasedimentary sequences represent then main rock types outcropping upstream on Nora alluvial deposits (Carmignani et al., 2016).

PARAGRAPH

The cluster analysis performed on the chemical data of the potsherds here described and of those attributed from previous studies (Amadori et al., 1995, 1996, 2002, 2006, 2009, 2017; Amadori and Fabbri, 1998a, 1998b, 1998c; Fabbri et al., 1998; Maraoui Telmini and Bouhlel, 2011) to Carthage and other production sites in western Sardinia (only major elements were considered since on the previous studies only such elements were analysed), indicates that the black-gloss ware found in Nora come from two distinct geographic regions.

In particular, the statistical analysis confirms petrographic indication on the provenance from Carthage of the quartz-rich ware, whereas quartz and foraminifer-rich ware derives from Tharros (Fig. 8).

The cluster of the latter potsherds also includes the clay materials collected in the area of Tharros, therefore constraining to this region the provenance of these materials.

This clear distinction can be observed also in the score plot of the principal component analysis (Fig. 9), where quartz-rich potsherds fall in the distribution region of the Carthage black-gloss production, while those rich in foraminifer shells in that of Tharros.

Remarkably, the Punic ware found at S. Antioco and M. Sirai is richer in Fe2O3, SiO2, MnO and Al2O3 (Figs. 8, 9), indicating the use of more argillaceous materials with respect to those produced in other localities of western Sardinia and in Carthage.

PARAGRAPH

As for the production technology, the mineralogical associations observed in the two groups of samples indicate firing temperature exceeding those of calcite reaction with silicate phases of the surrounding groundmass.

The occurrence in all the samples of newly formed calcium silicates, such as gehlenite and fassaite suggests partial decomposition of calcite at temperature around 800–850 °C in kiln-like firings (Riccardi et al., 1999; Maritan et al., 2006).

The presence of calcite also indicates that both large-sized fragments of limestone in quartz-rich pastes and shell remnants in quartz and foraminifer-rich potsherds did not react completely and recrystallized as calcite after firing (Fabbri et al., 2014; Allegretta et al., 2016a, 2016b).

Therefore, soaking time was not long enough to allow completion of reactions between the calcium oxide produced from calcite breakdown and the silicate groundmass.

These considerations are also supported by the microstructural evidence, in particular by the nearly complete obliteration of internal microstructures in foraminifer shells and the occurrence of reaction rims (Fig. 7c, d), the comparison of which with the experimental firing on shell fragments (Maritan et al., 2007), microfossil-bearing clays (Privitera et al., 2015) and speleothems (Tenconi et al., 2016), indicates that the black-gloss ware from Tharros was mainly fired at temperatures above 850 °C.

In these latter samples, moreover, the presence of diffraction peaks of illite/muscovite (Fig. 6b) indicates that phyllosilicates did not decomposed, constraining the firing temperature to the interval between 850 and 900 °C (Riccardi et al., 1999; Maritan et al., 2006).

The lack of illite/muscovite in the samples produced in Carthage (Fig. 6b) suggests that the firing temperature exceeded, even if slightly, 900–950 °C.

The occurrence of hematite in all the potsherds indicates that the firing process, at least the cooling stage, took place under oxidising conditions (Nodari et al., 2007).

SECTION

Conclusions

PARAGRAPH

The archaeometric study of the black-gloss ware found at the so called "Roman Temple" of Nora indicates that the pottery was imported in part from Carthage and in part form Tharros, a Punic settlement located about 150 km north of Nora.

It is worth considering that the occurrence of carbonate inclusions, such as limestone, calcite and shells, is considered to improve clay body workability, shock resistance and toughness of the resulting pots (Bronitsky and Hamer, 1986; Feathers, 1989, 2006; Skibo et al., 1989; Hoard et al., 1995; Tite et al., 2001; Feathers et al., 2003; Maritan et al., 2005; Tenconi et al., 2013; Allegretta et al., 2016a).

Therefore, the choice of using Ca-rich clay materials for the production of the black-gloss ware and the firing temperatures similar to those characterising the productions of Carthage, suggest artisan mobility and knowledge transfer from northern Africa to the regions of the Punic domain, analogously to what observed for the emigration of Attic potters (MacDonald, 1981).

This idea of know-how and craftsmen transfers from Africa to Sardinia is well consistent with the information derived from the literary and archaeological sources which give us many clues and indicators about an ample colonial movement of people from northern Africa to Sardinia between the end of the VI century BCE and the beginning of the V century BCE.

PARAGRAPH

Previous archaeometric studies on Archaic Phoenician and Punic ware, dated from the VIII to the IV century BCE (Amadori et al., 2017 and literature therein), pointed out the exportation of these products form Carthage and their imitation at only few specific specialised production centres such as Tharros and M. Sirai/S.

Antioco in western Sardinia, and Toscanos in south-western Spain.

This tradition persisted therefore also in the subsequent centuries, at least until the II century BCE, as attested in Nora.

Moreover, despite Nora represents an important Phoenician and Punic and then Roman site, large enough to establish its own workshops, this type of pottery was here imported from another regional consolidated production centre, as well as from Carthage, revealing an important connection to the vivid northern African centre even during the IV–II centuries BCE.