10.1016/j.jasrep.2018.08.001

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Origins of Epipalaeolithic obsidian artifacts from Garrod's excavations at Zarzi cave in the Zagros foothills of Iraq

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

In the Mesopotamian highlands, the Epipalaeolithic (EP) — that is, the portion of the Upper Palaeolithic that falls between the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM, 26.5 to ∼20 ka) and the start of the Neolithic (12 ka) — is a crucial period for investigating the rise of food production, sedentism, and other aspects of the so-called “Neolithic package.”

This timeframe is even considered “Period 0” in the Atlas des Sites du Proche-Orient (ASPO) chronological scheme, devised by the Maison de l'Orient et de la Méditerranée, as a means to conceptualize the rise of Neolithic phenomena that culminated in urbanism (Hours et al., 1994; Aurenche et al., 2001).

A variety of stimuli have been proposed for this “revolution” that appears, at least, to coincide with the beginning of the Holocene (∼11.65 ka).

Braidwood's (1951) “hilly flanks” hypothesis posited that agriculture and sedentism arose in the foothills of the Taurus and Zagros mountain ranges, where fertile land enabled grain gathering and which coincided with the natural habitats for the wild forms of domesticates.

Binford (1968) and Flannery (1969), in response to Braidwood, held that demographic pressures drove a shift to food production.

Hayden (1992) suggested that feasting and other opulent displays drove agriculture.

Individuals who could amass a food surplus were able to transform it into, for example, exotic and desirable objects, facilitating the rise of social inequality.

Price and Bar-Yosef (2011) point out that each of these scenarios is “very much a chicken-egg question, like the issue of population pressure, of which came first” (S167).

There is, though, an increasing recognition that certain aspects of the “Neolithic” package may have emerged at different times and places during the EP (e.g., Akkermans, 2004; Watkins, 2010; Weide et al., 2018).

Consequently, “Period 0” is an important time in which to seek archaeological evidence that can be contrasted against Neolithic datasets.

PARAGRAPH

Over the past five decades, obsidian artifact sourcing has played a vital role in revealing the interconnectedness of Neolithic communities across Mesopotamia.

Renfrew et al. (1965) pioneered obsidian sourcing to investigate development of the Minoan state and Mycenaean Greece and their roles in Bronze Age exchange systems throughout the Aegean.

Their technique was soon applied to the Neolithic revolution in the Near East (Renfrew et al., 1966, 1968).

Of great interest at this time was how farming spread between villages, which were typically thought to have been fairly isolated during the early Neolithic.

The spread of obsidian, however, showed that the settlements were not isolated and hinted that, as material moved, so too could have innovations.

Specifically, Dixon et al. (1968) interpreted the resulting distribution patterns (i.e., “fall-off curves”) as evidence for “down-the-line” trade, in which obsidian moved among communities via a chain of interactions.

Obsidian, they argued, can serve as an indicator of contacts between different Neolithic groups and might, in turn, define the type of their interactions.

More recently, new interpretive methods — agent-based models and complex systems theory (Ortega et al., 2014, 2016; Ibáñez et al., 2015), least-cost path analysis (Barge et al., 2018), and network analysis (Batist, 2014) — have been applied to the data of Renfrew et al. (1966, 1968) and subsequent studies (see Cauvin and Chataigner, 1998; Batist, 2014; Moutsiou, 2014) to elucidate the mechanisms of Neolithicization.

With respect to the EP, each of these studies relies on just one sourced — and ambiguously attributed — obsidian blade excavated from Zarzi cave in the Zagros foothills of the Kurdistan region of northern Iraq.

PARAGRAPH

In 1928, immediately following her excavations at Gibraltar and ten years before she became the Disney Professor of Archaeology at the University of Cambridge (Caton-Thompson, 1969; Davies, 1999), Dorothy Garrod led an expedition to Iraqi Kurdistan, jointly funded by the Percy Sladen Memorial Fund of the Linnaean Society of London and the American School of Prehistoric Research (ASPR).

Garrod's team included Charlotte A. Baynes and two ASPR representatives, Robert A. Franks, Jr. and Francis Turville-Petre (Garrod, 1930).

Baynes and particularly Turville-Petre had experience in western Asia (Bar-Yosef and Callander, 1997), both having excavated Emireh and Zuttiyeh Caves in what is now Israel in 1925–1926 (Turville-Petre, 1927).

Franks was a former ASPR field school student (Bricker, 2002), and based on archival data at the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology (PMAE) at Harvard University, he played an important role as manager of ASPR funds in the field (PMAE 2015.0.32, ASPR records, Box 1, Folder 4; PMAE 995-3, George Grant MacCurdy photographic records, Box 8).

The project's receipts and accounting data (PMAE 2015.0.32, ASPR records, Box 1, Folder 4) graphically, and depressingly, chronicle Turville-Petre's well-documented (Bar-Yosef and Callander, 1997) extreme levels of alcohol consumption.

Garrod and her team excavated at Zarzi cave for nine days and the Hazar Merd caves for seventeen days.

A follow-up excavation to complete the work at Hazar Merd and to conduct and expanded survey based around Halabja to the south was apparently planned for 1931 but canceled when the local antiquities department denied a research permit due to political instability (PMAE 2015.0.32, ASPR records, Box 1, Folder 4).

By this time, Garrod and Turville-Petre were focused on excavations at Kebara and subsequently the multiple sites at the Wadi Mughara (Bar-Yosef and Callander, 1997; Garrod and Bate, 1937), and they never returned to Iraqi Kurdistan.

PARAGRAPH

At Zarzi, Garrod and her team encountered a stratigraphic horizon, Layer B, with microlithic artifacts.

These artifacts composed “a typical Upper Aurignacian ensemble” that corresponded to “the final stage of the Upper Palaeolithic” (Garrod, 1930:22).

Cherts were the most abundant lithic raw material, and she concluded that these cherts were primarily acquired as river cobbles because many of the cores retained weathered exterior surfaces.

In total, she and her team recovered 648 complete or fragmented tools, nearly two thirds of which were notched blades (29.3%) and scrapers (34.7%).

Garrod (1930) briefly mentioned that, among the lithic artifacts, “two small fragments of obsidian were found” (16).

She did not elaborate, and as noted by Wahida (1981), Garrod's notebooks for the site have gone missing over the decades.

The Zarzi collections were dispersed among multiple institutions, including the Cambridge Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology (CMAA) in the UK (accession numbers 1930-7-19).

In the US, collections were shipped to institutions with strong connections to the ASPR, notably the PMAE (accession number 35-32-60), the Peabody Museum of Natural History at Yale University (accession number YPM ANT 014376), and the Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of Natural History (Petraglia and Potts, 2004).

After the excavations at Zarzi and Hazar Merd in 1928, the collaboration between Garrod and the ASPR continued the following year with ASPR co-funding the ground-breaking Palaeolithic research at Tabun, el-Wad, and Skhul in the Wadi el-Mughara (Garrod and Bate, 1937).

PARAGRAPH

One of the two Zarzi obsidian artifacts reappears in the literature in Renfrew and colleagues' application of obsidian sourcing to the Near East (Renfrew et al., 1966).

Rather than simply being a “fragment,” Renfrew et al. (1966) list the Zarzi artifact as a blade, and it was one of 132 obsidian artifacts from 42 sites included in the study.

It was also one of six artifacts contributed by the CMAA.

The analyses, for which Renfrew and colleagues settled on optical emission spectroscopy (OES), were conducted in Cambridge's Department of Mineralogy and Petrology.

Unfortunately, OES is partly destructive, necessitating specimens of ∼100 mg in the form of fine powder (Renfrew et al., 1965).

It is uncertain how much of the artifact may have been taken as a sample, but the CMAA catalog lists only “a chip of obsidian” among microliths (e.g., crescents, triangles, and backed pieces) from Zarzi.

Renfrew et al. (1966) attributed the blade to their “Group 4c,” which included the obsidian from two sources in eastern Turkey: Nemrut Dağ volcano and a source near the city of Bingöl, which came to be known as the “Bingöl A” obsidian source (Cauvin et al., 1986).

After the discovery of the latter, Renfrew et al. (1968) noted that Nemrut Dağ and Bingöl A obsidian are “difficult to distinguish… At present, therefore, obsidian of Group 4c may derive from either of these sources” (320).

This had no effect on their large-scale reconstruction of Neolithic obsidian distribution (Fig. 1a).

This ambiguity, however, is considerable when efforts to create high-resolution reconstructions remain predicated on this blade as the only sourced EP artifact (Fig. 1b; Barge et al., 2018).

That is, this blade, despite its inconclusive origin, has, until now, remained the sole datum for “Period 0” in Mesopotamia.

PARAGRAPH

The other Zarzi obsidian artifact basically disappeared from the literature.

It was recently “rediscovered” at Harvard's PMAE during a search of their collections for Aurignacian materials to build a teaching collection.

It turned up during this search because Garrod's original attribution of “upper Aurignacian” has been retained in the PMAE records database.

The artifact — a burin spall — is one of 78 lithic tools and cores from Zarzi at the PMAE, that is, ∼12% of Garrod's excavated assemblage.

A search through the museum's associated accession file (35-32) suggested how the Zarzi lithic artifacts arrived in their collection.

In May of 1935, ASPR transferred >700 artifacts, recovered from their excavations at various sites across Europe and the Near East, from the University of Pennsylvania's Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology to the PMAE.

George MacCurdy, Director of ASPR, wrote to Donald Scott, Director of the PMAE, on May 15, 1935 regarding this loan.

MacCurdy wrote that he was looking forward to seeing the collection on exhibit at the PMAE, and he also mentioned: “When we come [to visit], I shall bring along a proposition just received from Dorothy Garrod” (PMAE File 35-32).

Garrod's proposition is likely how this set of Zarzi artifacts (as well as a number of lithics from her Hazar Merd excavations) came to the PMAE, where they have been ever since.

PARAGRAPH

Our study establishes the origin of both obsidian artifacts excavated 90 years ago by Dorothy Garrod and her team.

Multivariate analyses are employed as a means to clarify the volcanic source of the blade at the CMAA, while state-of-the-art portable X-ray fluorescence (pXRF) has revealed the source of the burin spall at the PMAE.

The obsidian for both artifacts came from Nemrut Dağ volcano in eastern Turkey, ∼400 km linearly and ≳650 km on foot from the cave, which is the type site of the “Zarzian” industry.

These results offer a sharper insight into an EP site that, in the five decades since Renfrew et al. (1966), remains the only “Period 0” Mesopotamian site with sourced obsidian artifacts, meaning that the Zarzi artifacts currently occupy a unique niche in our knowledge of the EP.

One must look to “Period 1,” as the EP transitions into the Early Neolithic, before there are more sites with sourced obsidian artifacts (e.g., Mureybet 1A, Cauvin, 1991; Kortik Tepe, Carter et al., 2013).

As noted by Belfer-Cohen and Goring-Morris (2013) in their discussion of the Zarzian industry, “virtually no research has been conducted since the 1970s” (1397).

This will surely change as new excavations continue to take place in Iraqi Kurdistan; however, for now, Zarzi remains the only data point for obsidian distribution during the EP.

Comparison to two EP sites in the Caucasus begins to reveal a patchwork of interaction spheres that simultaneously highlight the high potential of obsidian sourcing and the great amount of work yet to be done.

SECTION

Background: Zarzi cave

PARAGRAPH

Zarzi cave (35.816° N, 45.024° E; 760 m asl) was excavated in 1928 by Dorothy Garrod and colleagues (Fig. 2; Garrod, 1930) and re-excavated, beneath a fallen rock, in 1971 by Ghanim Wahida and colleagues (Wahida, 1981, 1999).

The cave (which is perhaps better classified as a rockshelter) formed at a joint in the well-bedded Sinjar Formation limestone, exposed by a predecessor of the Cham Tabin River, which flows past the base of the slope.

Its dimensions are ∼8 m wide and ∼8 m deep with a maximum height of ∼2.3 m.

The occupation layers were ∼0.5 m deep and highly disturbed inside the south-facing cave, while layers outside the cave were ∼1.5–2.5 m thick (Fig. 3).

Lithic artifacts were most abundant immediately outside the cave and became scarcer down the slope.

Three soundings dug by Garrod and her team near the cave entrance were archaeologically sterile.

PARAGRAPH

Garrod (1930) describes the uppermost level, Layer A, as “a thin and much disturbed layer of earth” inside the cave (14).

It consisted of highly mixed materials, including lithic artifacts, pottery, and fairly recent animal bone.

Layer B, which extended onto the terrace in front of the cave mouth, was exclusively EP in nature.

Garrod (1930) concluded that Layer B “contained a single, unmixed archaeological level” that was largely undisturbed by later uses of the cave (14).

The artifacts were contained within a matrix of calcareous sediments and limestone fragments, both derived from the weathering of the limestone cave itself.

There were two bone implements but no ceramics in Layer B. No hearth features were observed, but some lithics exhibited crazing due to fire.

Further down the slope, Layer B covered Layer C, which was tougher and archaeologically sterile.

Wahida (1981) corroborated Garrod's basic stratigraphic observations but observed six subdivisions within Layer B, varying in color and texture, that had been preserved beneath the fallen rock.

PARAGRAPH

The cave's location would have been favorable to hunting as well as fishing.

Garrod (1930) reports remains — in a poor state of preservation — of Gazella (gazelle), Capra (goat), Vulpes (fox), Testudo (tortoise), and various land snail species.

Wahida (1981) encountered much better faunal preservation under the rock, which apparently provided a degree of protection.

He states that the faunal remains include a small tooth fragment from an Ovis (sheep) or Capra (goat), the calcaneum (heel bone) of an unidentified small mammal, and carapace fragments from a tortoise or turtle, similar to the findings of Garrod (1930).

Thanks to sieving in the later excavation, Wahida (1981) also recovered three small fish bone fragments as well as small fragments of a crustacean claw and carapace.

Among the various snail shells, Helix salomonica was most common, especially in the occupation layers, and sufficiently large to be worth collecting and consuming, a pattern widespread at nearby early Holocene strata at sites such as Jarmo and Bestansur (Reed, 1962; Iversen, 2015).

The faunal remains suggest to Wahida (1981) that Zarzi was occupied sporadically during hunting and fishing expeditions, likely in the spring.

The fauna also appear to be consistent with Flannery's (1969) proposed “broad spectrum revolution,” a precursor of the Neolithic revolution, during which foraging communities increased their subsistence base and dietary breadth.

PARAGRAPH

As noted in the Introduction, the assemblage was microlithic in character.

None of the lithic artifacts from Zarzi were larger than 10 cm, and most were smaller than 6 cm.

Garrod (1930) held that “there can be no possible doubt about the affinities of the Zarzi industry; the Gravette points, the angle-gravers, and the small round scrapers, taken together, make a typical Upper Aurignacian ensemble” that reflects “the final stage of the Upper Palaeolithic” (22).

Subsequent excavations at Zarzi (Wahida, 1981, 1999), Palegawra Cave (Braidwood and Howe, 1960) and Warwasi Rockshelter (Olszewski, 1993) upheld Garrod's definition of the “Zarzian” lithic industry.

She observes, though, that the lithic materials might have played a role in the artifact sizes.

Cherts, which were variable in color and texture, were most abundant among the lithics, followed by silicified limestones apparently from the local Sinjar Formation.

Because many of their cores exhibited cortical surfaces, Garrod (1930) argued that the cherts were acquired as local river cobbles, which are rather small.

She observed that the larger stone tools, including Gravette points, are made from either red chert, which must have been available in larger sizes, or silicified limestone, which was locally available in large chunks.

There were also two schist items: (1) a grooved implement perhaps used as a polisher for bone points and (2) a flat, round, undecorated pendant that could hang from a small drilled hole.

Bone tools were restricted to the polished, sharp tip of a small point and a roughly shaped pointed long bone fragment (Garrod, 1930).

PARAGRAPH

The dating of Zarzi unfortunately remains somewhat imprecise.

Garrod, of course, did not submit material from her 1928 excavations for carbon dating, and there are no dates from Wahida's excavations in 1971.

At present, there are only 14C dates for the “Zarzian” deposits at other sites in the Zagros region.

It should be acknowledged, however, that techno-typological correlations have their imperfections and that the dates predate modern advances for 14C determinations (e.g., AMS, ultrafiltration, calibration curves), so they should be regarded as age estimates.

At Shanidar, ∼130 km northwest, charcoal specimens from the “Zarzian” Sublayer B2 (USGS W-179; Rubin and Suess, 1955), after calibration (OxCal v4.3.2, Bronk Ramsey, 2017; IntCal v13, Reimer et al., 2013), indicate an age of ∼15.9–13.6 ka.

At Palegawra Cave, ∼30 km southeast of Zarzi, bone collagen (UCLA 1714D and 1703A; Turnbull and Reed, 1974), after calibration, yielded ages of ∼17.6–14.7 ka and ∼19.6–15.6 ka.

Zeder's (2006) AMS 14C dates for goat bones in Palegawra Cave fall between 15.5–14.2 ka and 10.1–9.6 ka.

Considering the assemblages from these three sites, Wahida (1981) holds that Zarzi is the oldest among them.

This is also consistent with Braidwood's (1951) “impression — with which Professor Garrod concurred… — that the Palegawra industry represents a slightly later phase than does that of Zarzi” (15).

These dates, while imperfect, clearly place Zarzi in the EP.

PARAGRAPH

Based on palynological evidence from the 1971 excavations and the available palaeoclimatic data for the Zagros (e.g., van Zeist, 1967, 1969; Wright, 1968, 1976), Leroi-Gouran (1981) proposed that the Zarzi sequence corresponds to “the very beginnings of climatic amelioration” immediately after the LGM (36).

Based on lacustrine sediment cores from Lake Zrebar, trees first reappeared in the Zagros as temperatures and rainfall started to rise circa ∼17.0–16.1 ka (Yale Y-1686; van Zeist, 1967).

At Shanidar, pollen within Sublayer B2 attests that savannah with trees, including oak and pistachio, occurred nearby (Leroi-Gourhan, 1969), whereas oak charcoal at Palegawra Cave suggests that at least some trees were available for firewood (Wright, 1968).

At Zarzi, though, Leroi-Gouran (1981) found that trees were absent at the base of the palynological sequence.

She also noted that only weak climatic improvements occur through the sequence, which implies that the warmer and wetter conditions of the Late Glacial Interstadial must not yet have arrived.

PARAGRAPH

Taken together, the radiometric, techno-typological, and environmental correlations exhibit reasonable agreement and suggest a timeframe of ∼18–16 ka for Zarzi Cave.

This is consistent with Belfer-Cohen and Goring-Morris' (2013) placement of the Zarzian techno-complex at ∼18–14 ka.

It seems, therefore, that both Zarzi itself and the broader “Zarzian” phenomenon sit between the LGM and a return to cooler, drier conditions during the Younger Dryas (∼13–11.7 ka).

SECTION

Part 1: statistical analysis of the CMAA Zarzi blade

PARAGRAPH

Most obsidians around the world, especially those created by subduction of tectonic plates, are alkaline — that is, the Al2O3 content exceeds the sum of the Na2O and K2O contents.

All but two obsidian sources across the Near East, spanning from the Aegean Sea to the Southern Caucasus, are alkaline in composition.

The two exceptions — Nemrut Dağ volcano and the Bingöl A source (Fig. 1a) — have peralkaline obsidians, which are typical of divergent plate boundaries.

While Nemrut Dağ and Bingöl A are ∼120 km apart, their obsidians are similar in composition, so much so that many studies have struggled to discern them, even using sensitive analytical techniques (e.g., Abbès et al., 2001, 2003; Bellot-Gurlet and Poupeau, 2006; Khalidi et al., 2009, 2013), a problem that dates back as far as the pioneering work of Renfrew and colleagues (Renfrew et al., 1968).

PARAGRAPH

Renfrew et al. (1966) analyzed the Zarzi blade and assigned it to their “Group 4c” obsidian type, which included five geological specimens from Nemrut Dağ volcano.

These specimens were collected during an 1896 geological survey of the volcano (Oswald, 1906) and accessioned in 1917 by the Natural History Museum in London.

Consequently, Renfrew et al. (1966) concluded that the Zarzi blade originated from Nemrut Dağ.

It was not until later that Renfrew et al. (1968) analyzed a specimen of Bingöl A obsidian and discovered its similarity to Nemrut Dağ obsidian.

Thus, Renfrew et al. (1968) concede that any of the obsidian artifacts assigned to their “Group 4c may derive from either of these sources” (320).

This ambiguity, however, did not upset their central interpretations regarding the transport of obsidian into Mesopotamia and the Levant (Fig. 1a).

PARAGRAPH

A reason for difficulties in distinguishing Nemrut Dağ and Bingöl A obsidians is that certain elements often used to discern alkaline obsidians are less effective for peralkaline obsidians.

For example, Sr is one of the most useful elements for sourcing alkaline obsidians; however, it is nearly absent in peralkaline obsidians due to its incorporation into Ca-rich plagioclase crystals while the magma is molten.

Trace elements can still reflect subtle differences between Nemrut Dağ and Bingöl A obsidians, but sometimes making this distinction requires combining the elements to create new functions.

Pernicka (1992), for instance, used two functions that combined eight trace elements as a means to separate Nemrut Dağ and Bingöl A obsidians:Cs+Ta+Rb/100+Th/10+La/10+Ce/10/Scvs.Fe/Sc

PARAGRAPH

Similarly, Forster and Grave (2012) distinguished Nemrut Dağ and Bingöl A obsidians with a series of three principal components analysis (PCA) functions based on six elements (Fe, Rb, Sr, Y, Zr, Nb), but canonical variate analysis with the same elements was less successful.

PARAGRAPH

Renfrew and colleagues' interpretation of their OES data was limited by the methods of data analysis available to them in the 1960s.

In an interview (Bradley, 1993:74), Renfrew discussed the process of conducting and interpreting their OES measurements:

PARAGRAPH

An old school friend of mine, Joe Cann… was a fellow of St. John's College at that time and a research worker in the Department of Mineralogy and Petrology… It was he who suggested the optical emission spectroscopy approach.

Then we did it very much together.

We selected the material systematically and sat there grinding up the samples with pestles and mortars.

A senior technician in their department ran the samples through the spectroscope, and Joe read off the data from the resulting photographic plates.

What would emerge then would be a table of figures, and we had great fun together working out how we might best interpret those figures.

PARAGRAPH

These analyses resulted in values for 20 elements.

Fifteen elements are reported by Renfrew et al. (1966, 1968): Ba, Sr, Zr, Y, Nb, La, Rb, Li, Mn, Ga, V, Pb, Ca, Fe, and Mg.

Their data for Cr, Ni, Co, and Cu were inflated due to contamination from a satellite mortar, so those elements were omitted, and Sn consistently occurred below detection limits and, therefore, was not reported either (Cann and Renfrew, 1964).

Their numbered chemical groups, though, were primarily defined by scatterplots, especially Ba vs. Zr as well as Y vs. Nb to make distinctions within Group 4.

To make distinctions in Group 1, however, Renfrew et al. (1965) used more sophisticated functions:Zr/2+Nb+Pb+Fe/100vs.Li+Ca/100+Mg/10

PARAGRAPH

Today it is much easier to implement multivariate methods of data analysis to consider all 15 of the measured elements simultaneously and explore subtle compositional patterns.

PARAGRAPH

Specifically, agglomerative hierarchical clustering (AHC) can be applied to their original OES data to see if discrimination between Nemrut Dağ and Bingöl A obsidians is possible and if, in fact, their Zarzi blade can be more confidently attributed to one of these sources.

AHC is a “bottom up” variety of cluster analysis that starts with individual observations and combines them into clusters rather than a “top down” approach that begins with the full dataset and divides it into clusters.

Fig. 4 shows the resulting dendrogram of AHC with Euclidean distance as the dissimilarity metric and with Ward's minimum variance method as the linking criterion.

Ward's method is an ANOVA-based approach, in which the observations are merged into clusters that, at each step, yield the smallest possible increase in within-cluster variance.

After a logarithmic transformation to make major and trace elements more comparable (i.e., the elements, before transformation, varied across four orders of magnitude), all 15 elements from Renfrew et al. (1966, 1968) were used in the AHC to calculate this dendrogram.

PARAGRAPH

As expected, the peralkaline obsidian sources — Nemrut Dağ and Bingöl A — split off from the alkaline sources at the very top of the dendrogram.

These five Nemrut Dağ obsidian specimens are differentiated from the Bingöl A specimen, while the Zarzi blade clusters with the Nemrut Dağ specimens.

This result, though, is not as straightforward as it initially appears.

The concern stems from the fact that the Zarzi blade and the Nemrut Dağ specimens were measured for Renfrew et al. (1966) and the Bingöl A specimen was measured later for Renfrew et al. (1968).

Consequently, the direct comparison of these datasets relies on reproducibility, that is, the “closeness of agreement... under changed conditions” (Taylor and Kuyatt, 1994).

In this instance, there were two years over which the spectroscope's reproducibility might have wavered.

Thus, it is important to assess if bias exists between the datasets from the two publications (Renfrew et al., 1966, 1968).

PARAGRAPH

Fig. 5 is a dendrogram, using the same AHC protocols as Fig. 4, with the “Group 4c” artifacts and geological specimens from both publications (Renfrew et al., 1966, 1968).

The artifacts tested by Renfrew et al. (1966) fall on the right side of the dendrogram and cluster with the Nemrut Dağ specimens, whereas four of the six artifacts tested by Renfrew et al. (1968) fall on the left side and cluster with the Bingöl A specimen.

It appears that there is a subtle bias that makes the artifacts more likely to cluster with the particular geological specimens tested at the same time (i.e., artifacts in Renfrew et al., 1966 are more likely to cluster with geological specimens in the same publication).

Keeping in mind the small sample size in Renfrew et al. (1968), certain elements exhibit significantly different concentration ranges between the two artifact populations, including Zr (two-tailed t-test p value: 0.025), Ga (0.009), Pb (0.020), and Ca (0.013).

It must be asked, of course, whether these two populations exhibit compositional differences because their proportions of Nemrut Dağ and Bingöl A obsidians differ.

At some Near Eastern sites, only Nemrut Dağ obsidian has been identified (Tell Brak, Frahm, 2014), whereas only Bingöl A has been identified at others (Cafer Höyük, Tell Gudeda, Tell 'Atij, Frahm, 2014).

Yet other sites have artifacts from both of these sources (Tell Mozan, Frahm and Feinberg, 2013; Hassek Höyük, Frahm, 2014; Domuztepe, Frahm et al., 2016).

PARAGRAPH

Fortunately, Renfrew et al. (1968) sourced three obsidian artifacts from the excavations of Halet Çambel and Robert J. Braidwood at the Neolithic site of Çayönü in southeastern Turkey.

It is serendipitous that (1) two of the Çayönü artifacts cluster with Nemrut Dağ while a third one clusters with Bingöl A and (2) two previous studies able to make distinctions between Nemrut Dağ and Bingöl A obsidians tested artifacts from Çayönü and identified both sources.

After conducting fieldwork at Nemrut Dağ volcano, Wright (1969) used neutron activation analysis (NAA) and found that two Nemrut Dağ flows could be distinguished from each other and from “a flow located about 50 km east of Bingöl” (15) on the basis of Mn, Fe, Sc, and Zr.

Out of the six peralkaline artifacts from Çayönü, five matched Nemrut Dağ, and one matched Bingöl A.

In a later study, Bigazzi et al. (1996) supplemented their NAA measurements with fission-track dating, which is useful because Bingöl A obsidian is much older (3.2–5.1 Ma; Chataigner et al., 1998; Bigazzi et al., 1998) than Nemrut Dağ obsidians (310 ka on its slopes and < 30 ka in the caldera; Notsu et al., 1995; Yılmaz et al., 1998).

As a result, Bigazzi et al. (1996) were able to distinguish both old (Bingöl A) and young (Nemrut Dağ) peralkaline obsidian artifacts from Çayönü.

Therefore, the working hypotheses are that (1) AHC in Fig. 5 has correctly sorted the Çayönü artifacts between Nemrut Dağ and Bingöl A and that (2) the statistical bias is real but not so marked as to obscure such an outcome for Çayönü.

PARAGRAPH

Thus, there can be high confidence that the Zarzi blade is correctly ascribed to Nemrut Dağ.

Specifically, in Fig. 4, this blade clusters more closely with one of the Nemrut Dağ specimens than any two specimens do with each other.

Furthermore, in Fig. 5, the blade is far on the opposite side of the dendrogram from the Bingöl A specimen, not simply somewhere in the middle.

Consequently, all of the data point to the Zarzi blade at CMAA matching Nemrut Dağ volcano.

SECTION

Part 2: elemental analysis of the PMAE Zarzi burin spall

PARAGRAPH

As reported in the Introduction, the other Zarzi obsidian artifact is one of 78 lithic tools and cores from this site now housed at the PMAE at Harvard University.

PMAE curatorial staff kindly granted access to this artifact for pXRF analysis.

SECTION

Description of the PMAE Zarzi artifact

PARAGRAPH

The artifact (Fig. 6; 19.8 × 5.2 × 3.9 mm, 408 mg) is a small, slightly larger than a United States one-cent piece.

It has not been retouched, but differences in patination indicate edge damage that has occurred sometime over the nine decades since it was excavated.

By Bordean metric criteria, it could be classified as either a blade or bladelet (Bordes, 1961).

According to standard morphological criteria in Levantine EP research, however, it would be classified as a bladelet (L ≤ 50 mm, W ≤ 12 mm) rather than a blade (L ≤ 2W; Bar-Yosef, 1981; Bar-Yosef and Kuhn, 1999).

However, the thick triangular cross section of the piece suggests that it is the proximal fragment of a primary burin spall (Tixier, 1963; Inizan et al., 1999).

Burins from which such a spall could have been removed from represent ~3–5% of the tools reported by Garrod (1930) and Wahida (1981), but none are present in the PMAE collection.

Classification as a burin spall fits coherently into the overall typology of the chert and limestone tools at Zarzi; there is nothing remarkable about this artifact other than its raw material.

SECTION

Geological obsidian specimens

PARAGRAPH

Elemental data for the relevant obsidian sources were not pulled from the literature for this study.

Such an approach has been identified as one of the reasons that discerning Nemrut Dağ and Bingöl A obsidians has been so challenging in prior studies (Chataigner, 1998).

Poidevin (1998), for example, compiled the data from several laboratories and argued that “the bulk of the dispersion is directly attributable to analytical problems” (141; translated).

As a result, Rosen et al. (2005) note that attributions to Nemrut Dağ or Bingöl A should be “confirmed through analysis of both artifacts and geological samples using the same instrument” (780).

This is the approach used in the study at hand.

The Nemrut Dağ specimens were collected in 1991 by Tuncay Ercan, Directorate of Mineral Research and Exploration, Turkey and George “Rip” Rapp, Jr., Archaeometry Laboratory, University of Minnesota-Duluth.

The Bingöl A specimens were collected in 1984 and 1985 by Fovad Şarğolu, Directorate of Mineral Research and Exploration, Turkey and Marie-Claire Cauvin, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, France.

In fact, flakes analyzed for this study are subsamples from the original “type specimens” of Bingöl A obsidian reported by Cauvin et al. (1986).

SECTION

Selecting elements for peralkaline obsidians

PARAGRAPH

Discerning Nemrut Dağ and Bingöl A obsidians requires sensitive measurements of carefully chosen elements that reflect differences in peralkaline compositions.

Early studies noted groups in peralkaline obsidian involving key elements.

For example, at the University of Bradford, Groups G1, G2, and G3 were distinguished using Fe and Sc (Epstein, 1977), and at CNR Rome, A1 and A2 were discerned using Mn, Rb, and Zr (Fornaseri et al., 1975).

Orange et al. (2013) had markedly greater success discerning Nemrut Dağ and Bingöl A obsidians using PCA of Al, Si, Ca, and Fe measured by scanning electron microscopy with energy-dispersive spectrometry (SEM-EDS) than they did using Sr, Zr, Y, Nb, and Pb measured by energy-dispersive XRF (EDXRF).

Darabi and Glascock (2013) note that Mn and Sr (measured using NAA) can distinguish Nemrut Dağ and Bingöl A, whereas Rb and Zr (measured using an older pXRF instrument) could not.

Campbell and Healey (2016), though, could differentiate these obsidians with Mn, Fe, Rb, and Zr with a newer pXRF instrument.

Frahm (2012a) showed that electron microprobe analysis (EMPA) can separate Nemrut Dağ and Bingöl A obsidians on the basis of Al, Ti, Fe, and Zr.

This result is unsurprising given that Merrick and Brown (1984), using EMPA, established the effectiveness of three elements — Ca, Ti, and Fe — to distinguish East African Rift obsidians, which are often peralkaline.

More than three decades later, EMPA is still used to source peralkaline Kenyan artifacts based on Al, Cl, Ti, and Fe (Blegen, 2017).

PARAGRAPH

Of the elements in these studies, four elements appear to be most successful: Al, Ti, Mn, and Fe.

Given the low energy of its characteristic X-rays, Al can be challenging to quantify using pXRF or EDXRF with the sensitivity needed to differentiate Nemrut Dağ and Bingöl A obsidians.

This leaves Ti, Mn, and Fe as the elements of primary interest.

These elements are, fortunately, well measured by both pXRF and EMPA.

It is also worth noting that the relationships between Ti, Mn, and Fe have been frequently used for source identification in three of the United States' EDXRF-based obsidian analytical labs — Northwest Research Obsidian Studies Laboratory (e.g., Skinner and Davis, 1996; Skinner et al., 1997; Skinner and Thatcher, 2009), Geochemical Research Laboratory (e.g., Hughes and Pavesic, 2005; Roper and Hughes, 2014), and Geoarchaeological XRF Laboratory (e.g., Shackley, 2006, 2017) — due, in part, to a recommendation made by Davis et al. (1998) regarding elemental ratios that remain stable for obsidian artifacts of small or irregular morphologies.

SECTION

pXRF instrument and procedures

PARAGRAPH

The burin spall and the comparative geological specimens were analyzed using an Olympus Vanta M-series pXRF instrument.

The instrument is outfitted with a Rh anode and a 4-W X-ray tube capable of voltages up to 50 kV.

In the GeoChem mode, voltage automatically varies in combination with built-in beam filters to sequentially fluoresce the heavier (40 kV) and lighter (10 kV) portions of the periodic table.

The emitted X-rays are measured with a large-area (40 mm2) Si drift detector and low-noise signal-processing electronics that permit high count rates (≳100,000 counts/s) at a high resolution (≲140 eV).

The measurement time was increased to 60 s due to the small sizes of the artifact and specimens and the need for highly precise elemental data.

PARAGRAPH

Measured X-rays must be corrected for a series of phenomena that occur within matter (e.g., absorption, attenuation, secondary and tertiary fluorescence) to convert the signals into elemental concentrations.

There are different approaches to correction, including older empirical methods (Sherman, 1955; Lucas-Tooth and Price, 1961).

Using its onboard quad-core Linux processor, this instrument uses the fundamental parameters (FP) method, which utilizes a physics-based model to describe relationships between X-ray intensities and elemental concentrations and to account for a variety of parameters (e.g., fluorescent and absorption edge energies, mass attenuation coefficients, Coster-Kronig transition probabilities).

FP has been used in select EDXRF applications for decades (de Boer and Brouwer, 1990), but because it requires intensive calculations, only pXRF instruments with powerful onboard processors can implement FP during a measurement.

SECTION

pXRF calibration and evaluation

PARAGRAPH

For this study, the pXRF data were calibrated using EMPA data for a set of matched Nemrut Dağ specimens.

As a major technique in the geosciences, EMPA offers accuracies and repeatabilities that rival other techniques for the elements of interest here.

The analyses were conducted with the JEOL JXA-8900 “SuperProbe” at the Electron Microprobe Laboratory, Department of Earth Sciences, University of Minnesota.

The analytical procedures are detailed elsewhere (Frahm, 2012b), so only the most relevant information is listed here.

The geological specimens as well as the primary and secondary standards were measured under the same conditions (15 kV accelerating voltage; 50 nA current; 30 μm beam diameter; 25 s for the X-ray peak and 25 for the background levels on each side of the peak).

The relevant primary (i.e., calibration) standards were hornblende (Kakanui, New Zealand; Smithsonian NMNH 143965) for Ti and Fe and hortonolite (Franklin, New Jersey, USA; UC 27) for Mn.

To correct the raw data for various phenomena (e.g., X-ray absorption and attenuation, secondary fluorescence), matrix corrections — specifically, the JEOL's physics-based ZAF scheme — were applied to every measurement.

Accuracy was checked against a secondary standard: obsidian from Yellowstone National Park (Wyoming, USA; Smithsonian NMNH 72854, VG-568).

PARAGRAPH

The pXRF and EMPA data for the elements of interest exhibited high correlations: R2 = 0.99 for all three.

Fig. 7 includes scatterplots of the EMPA vs. factory-calibrated pXRF measurements for (a) Mn, (d) Ti, and (e) Fe.

The Vanta's factory calibration is based on a broad range of certified reference standards, and it is intended to be useful across a wide variety of mining and geological applications, so it is expected that minor adjustments will be required to maximize reproducibility for the narrow compositional range of peralkaline obsidians.

It should be noted, however, that this initial calibration is, even before “fine tuning” to these obsidians, already quite good.

The slopes of the best-fit lines are nearly 1 (i.e., 0.99–1.06), although the intercepts require more adjustment for the highest accuracy.

These slopes and intercepts can be entered into the Vanta software and saved as a set of custom “User Factors” for subsequent analyses of obsidian specimens.

PARAGRAPH

To emphasize the high-quality of these pXRF data, matched Nemrut Dağ obsidian specimens were also analyzed at the Archaeometry Laboratory of the University of Missouri Research Reactor (MURR) using NAA and bench-top EDXRF.

Their standard NAA and EDXRF procedures for obsidian specimens are reported by Glascock and Giesso (2012).

NAA consisted of two irradiations in the reactor and three measurements of the emitted gamma rays, the last of which occurred about four weeks after the second irradiation, and EDXRF was conducted using an ElvaX instrument (30 mm2 Si PN-diode detector with a resolution of ∼180 eV at 1000 counts/s and a W X-ray tube operated at 35 kV for 400-sec measurements).

Their ElvaX instrument was empirically corrected and had been calibrated specifically for obsidian (Speakman and Shackley, 2013:1437).

PARAGRAPH

Consider that Mn is one of the elements best measured by NAA.

Specifically, the sensitivity for Mn is so high that NAA can detect as little as a picogram (one trillionth of a gram) of the element in a specimen, whereas the detection limits for Fe are as much as a million times higher (Glascock, 2018).

Fig. 7b shows how well even the factory-calibrated pXRF measurements match the NAA values for Mn.

The reproducibility and linearity are nearly perfect: R2 = 0.99 and a slope of 1.01.

As with the EMPA data, the intercept requires some adjustment.

For comparison, Fig. 7c shows the EDXRF vs. NAA data for Mn.

The EDXRF data have a lower R2 (0.88) and a worse slope (0.77) with respect to the NAA data than the factory-calibrated pXRF data.

This is also true for Fe (Fig. 7e–f).

This superior reproducibility of the Vanta pXRF occurs despite the ElvaX EDXRF instrument being corrected and calibrated especially for obsidian (Speakman and Shackley, 2013).

PARAGRAPH

Consequently, the data reported here (Table 1) are highly accurate because they have been fully corrected (using FP) and calibrated (using matched Nemrut Dağ obsidian specimens analyzed by EMPA in order to fine-tune the factory-set calibrations via regression analysis).

SECTION

Results for the Peabody artifact

PARAGRAPH

Fig. 8 is a scatterplot that shows (1) how well the pXRF measurements of Fe, Mn, and Ti can separate the six Nemrut Dağ obsidian clusters reported by Frahm (2012a) from the two localities of Bingöl A obsidian and (2) how well the Peabody Zarzi artifact matches Nemrut Dağ.

Clusters 3, 4, and 5 of Nemrut Dağ are sufficiently similar that it cannot be confidently ascribed to a particular one, but Clusters 1, 2, and 6 are easily excluded from the possibilities.

Consequently, the Cambridge and Peabody artifacts have consistent geological origins: Nemrut Dağ volcano.

SECTION

Discussion of the results

PARAGRAPH

It can now be stated with confidence that both Zarzi obsidian artifacts excavated by Dorothy Garrod and her team — the blade at the CMAA, and the burin spall at the PMAE — originated at Nemrut Dağ volcano, which lies ∼400 km linearly and ≳650 km on foot from the cave.

These are the only obsidian artifacts from Zarzi, but there are other occurrences in Zarzian deposits at Palegawra and Shanidar.

Braidwood and Howe (1960) reported “scattered but definite traces of obsidian debris” at Palegawra, and the University of Chicago's Oriental Institute Museum is home to at least a dozen obsidian artifacts from this cave.

At Shanidar, Solecki (1963) mentioned “several obsidian samples” in the Upper Palaeolithic (UP) Layer C, Zarzian Sublayer B2, and “Proto-Neolithic” Sublayer B1.

Two obsidian flakes from Shanidar Layer C were analyzed by Renfrew et al. (1966), who attributed one to “Group 4c” (again either Nemrut Dağ or Bingöl A) and the other to “Group 1e–f” (for which there are a few far-flung possibilities, including the Kars sources in eastern Turkey and Acıgöl in central Turkey).

No artifacts from Shanidar Layers B1 and B2 were sourced, although three were sent for hydration dating (Evans and Meggers, 1960).

Thus, as noted by various authors (e.g., Cauvin and Chataigner, 1998; Chataigner et al., 1998; Batist, 2014; Moutsiou, 2014), there is a long-standing shortage of sourced UP and EP obsidian artifacts across Mesopotamia.

In turn, even conclusively establishing the origin of these two Zarzi artifacts is a notable improvement and allows us, for example, to reject the proposed paths between Bingöl A and Zarzi (Fig. 1b).

PARAGRAPH

As noted by Glascock (2002), archaeological materials (e.g., obsidian) “that were exchanged between different areas and different societies are the most tangible evidence that an archaeologist can hope for when looking to establish contact between prehistoric peoples” (1).

The occurrence of obsidian at Zarzi and Zarzian sites combined with a hiatus between Layer C (UP) and Sublayer B2 (Zarzian) at Shanidar led to conjecture that, after the LGM, this region was re-inhabited by groups from the north, perhaps as far as the Southern or even Northern Caucasus (Mellaart, 1965:16).

This idea carried over to the Soviet literature, in which it was speculated that EP sites in Armenia linked so-called “Imeretian” sites in Georgia to the Zarzian sites in the Zagros (Bader, 1966, 1984; Lyubin, 1989).

Thus, as noted by Gasparyan et al. (2014), Armenia has a key role to play in establishing the existence or absence of such connections.

Unfortunately, EP datasets in the Southern and Northern Caucasus are limited too: there is one EP site in each area with sourced obsidian.

PARAGRAPH

In the Northern Caucasus, Mezmaiskaya Cave lies near the Georgian-Russian border, and its EP lithic assemblage is 0.93% obsidian (n = 203), including flakes, blanks, core-trimming elements, and debris (Doronicheva and Shackley, 2014).

Of these artifacts, a set of 14 flakes, blade fragments, and chips were sourced by EDXRF and matched to two obsidian sources in Georgia and Russia.

Ten artifacts (including the three blade fragments) were attributed to Chikiani volcano (also called the Paravani Lake source) on the Javakheti Plateau of Georgia, ∼400 km linearly and ≳575 km on foot to the southeast, similar to the distance between Nemrut Dağ and Zarzi.

The remaining flakes and chips matched the Baksan River obsidian source (also called Zayukovo) in the Kabardino-Balkar Republic of Russia.

This obsidian source is ∼300 km linearly southeast but, due to the mountainous terrain, is ≳650 km on foot, again similar to the distance from Nemrut Dağ to Zarzi.

PARAGRAPH

In the Southern Caucasus, the open-air site of Kalavan 1 lies in the mountains north of Lake Sevan in Armenia and has been dated to ∼17–16 ka (Montoya et al., 2013).

Chataigner and Gratuze (2014) measured 18 obsidian flakes from Kalavan 1 using LA-ICP-MS and attributed all of them to four sources in Armenia: Hatis (n = 10) and Gutansar (3) volcanoes along Hrazdan Gorge (≳120 km on foot), an obsidian source in the Gegham mountain range (n = 4; ≳140 km on foot), and one of the Syunik sources in southern Armenia (n = 1; ≳250 km on foot).

None of their analyzed flakes match obsidian sources in Georgia or Turkey.

This is, however, a small, unrepresentative sample at a site where the lithic assemblage (n = 2317) is ∼58% obsidian (Montoya et al., 2013), so limitations of the data should be kept in mind.

It is noteworthy, though, that the Chikiani source in Georgia is only ∼140 km linearly and ≳250 km on foot from Kalavan 1, meaning it is approximately the same distance as the Syunik obsidian sources.

Nemrut Dağ is markedly farther from Kalavan 1 — ∼ 350 km linearly and ≳450 km on foot — but Zarzi is even farther from this obsidian source.

PARAGRAPH

Although these few EP sites allow only broad brushstrokes, there is a key observation to be made.

If one interpreted site-to-source obsidian transport distances as a measure of the radius of Palaeolithic foraging territories, as Moutsiou (2014) does, the resulting areas circumscribed around Zarzi, Kalavan 1, and Mezmaiskaya Cave would intersect (Fig. 9a), leading to the impression that Zarzian communities in the Zagros may well have been connected to Imeretian communities in the Northern Caucasus via an extended social network with Armenia in the middle.

There are, though, no obsidian sources in common at the three sites, at least within the analyzed samples.

The utilized sources reveal instead an isolated patchwork when the areas over which obsidian was transported are much more tightly constrained, although still with a high degree of abstraction (Fig. 9b).

Even simple changes to the geometric interpretation of source-to-site distances — from radii to polygons — radically alters the likelihood of interactions between these sites' occupants.

PARAGRAPH

Therefore, sourcing EP obsidian artifacts, especially using pXRF, offers a means to develop a more sophisticated understanding of mobility and subsistence strategies, resource access, and social networks during “Period 0” of Neolithization across the Near East.

There is not only great promise in sourcing to elucidate these phenomena but also considerable work yet to be done.

SECTION

Concluding remarks

PARAGRAPH

The excavations of Dorothy Garrod continue to yield new results 90 years later.

Both of the obsidian artifacts that she and her team excavated at Zarzi cave originated from Nemrut Dağ, which lies ≳650 km on foot from the site.

The finding is a result of new statistical analyses of five-decade-old data from Renfrew et al. (1966, 1968) and new elemental analyses using a state-of-the-art pXRF instrument, which has the sensitivity to distinguish Nemrut Dağ and Bingöl A obsidians, a long-standing challenge in Near Eastern obsidian sourcing.

Other Zarzian sites in the Zagros range, such as Palegawra, are known to have had obsidian artifacts, but none have been sourced yet or, for that matter, even described well (e.g., “scattered but definite traces of obsidian debris,” Braidwood and Howe, 1960).

Comparison to Kalavan 1 in the Southern Caucasus and Mezmaiskaya Cave in the Northern Caucasus currently allows only for a low-resolution reconstruction of EP interactions, but an important trend already emerges.

At this inter-regional scale, these sites' residents were moving not through a series of overlapping circular territories but instead within a patchwork of areas that, based on the available data, did not intersect.

These should be understood as initial results, but the obsidian data suggest that, for example, Zarzian communities were not simply “once removed” from Imeretian communities via inter-regional networks.

Considerably greater spatiotemporal resolution in obsidian sourcing is needed to understand how these and other EP communities articulated on physical and cultural landscapes.