10.1016/j.jasrep.2018.08.032

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Fire conditions and source materials recorded in scoria from an intentional fire at Store Tovstrup Iron Age house, Central Jutland, Denmark

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

The Store Tovstrup Iron Age site is located on the Jutland peninsula in Western Denmark on the bank of the minor meandering Savstrup Å (creek), approximately 1.2 km east of the point where it meets the larger river Storå (literally translated ‘big river,’ the second longest river in Denmark) (Fig. 1A).

The site was excavated in 2014–16 by Holstebro Museum in preparation for major road constructions in the area planned to be completed in 2018.

The location is only 1.5 km south of the maximum extend of the Weichselian ice sheet (Fig. 1A), marked by a large outcrop of clayey till, on a glacial alluvial outwash plain made of broad sandy river valleys (known as ‘Karup hedeslette’ or ‘outwashed sandy plain’ on Fig. 1A; Milthers, 1948; Houmark-Nielsen, 1999; Christensen, 2016).

The surface deposit of the immediate area consists of quarts-rich sand, gravel, and, occasionally, clayey sediments.

Immediately south of the site is an eroded riverbank and a river valley, made-up of fresh water, lacustrine deposits.

With the final retreat of the Weichselian ice, both sea level and land surface rose to reach a maximum during late early pre-Roman Iron Age (400–300 BCE), resulting in the local formation of lakes and the stabilization of waterways around the Tovstrup site (Behre, 2007; Odgaard and Dalsgaard, 2014).

PARAGRAPH

The site contains numerous houses and other settlement structures from several prehistoric periods (e.g., Fig. 1B) as well as traces of a medieval farmstead, likely a predecessor of the still existing Store Tovstrup farm (Hansen, 2018a).

Like the vast majority of prehistoric sites in the region (Hvass, 1985; Webley, 2008; Hansen, 2018b), the Tovstrup site does not contain above the ground remains or ruins; only pits, postholes, and other subsoil-level remains are preserved.

PARAGRAPH

The pre-Roman house is of the type known throughout northwestern Europe during the time, with two rows of central roof bearing posts and two centrally placed doors, in the centers of the northern and southern walls.

The dwelling area is located to the west and the byre to the east of the entrances (Webley, 2008, p. 73–74).

Our knowledge of the building materials, construction and condition of the house at the time of the fire is limited.

We know that it had an earthen or clay floor, wattle walls, plastered with daub or clay, and an inner construction consisting of two rows of wooden posts, holding up the roof.

Houses of the type excavated at the Tovstrup site had two centrally placed doors, in the center of the northern and southern walls.

To the east of the entrance was the byre, sometimes divided into stalls, and to the west the dwelling area.

It is not clear, if a roof vent was placed directly above the open floor fire or if one was placed in the gable on either end of the house.

All of these factors are important, as they would impact the airflow at the time of the fire.

PARAGRAPH

It is generally presumed that houses from this period had either reed thatched or turf roofs (Webley, 2008).

In this case, a turf roof might be indicated by the presence of a mottled layer of light and dark sand, surrounding the burned Tovstrup house.

This layer looks consistent with the original sandy topsoil in the area, before intensive farming added to the content of organic material in the topsoil.

PARAGRAPH

The dating of the houses is typologically estimated, as no 14C are dates are available.

Typological criteria include the distance between individual postholes, the presence/absence of foundations for walls and inner structures as well as the overall layout of the houses (Rindel, 1997; Ethelberg et al., 2003; Hansen, 2018b).

Typological dating is oftentimes more accurate than carbon dates within the pre-Roman Iron Age time frame, because of the so-called Hallstatt plateau (800–400 BCE) on the calibration curve (Haidas, 2008; Hamilton et al., 2015).

On this background, the tentative date for the pre-Roman house is 500–100 BCE and the Roman house roughly the first century AD.

PARAGRAPH

The scoria particles containing preserved glass were from soil sampled from mostly postholes in a Roman period house or from postholes of uncertain origin.

The scoria examined in details in this study originates from one posthole marked X8582 in Fig. 1B.

This Roman house was constructed on a partially preserved burned debris field of an older pre-Roman house.

The debris is believed to have covered a larger area, but is preserved in this spot because of a small depression in the ground, preserving it from modern ploughing.

The scoria fragments were thus secondarily deposited and pre-dates the Roman house.

The holes for the Roman roof bearing posts were dug through the remains of the older, pre-Roman house and the scoria fragments deposited and preserved as the result of the construction of the later Roman house.

PARAGRAPH

The scoria fragments were examined in detail using microanalysis techniques.

The objective of the study was to determine the composition, constrain the melting temperature, and fingerprint the source material.

This can provide clues about local choices of building materials and has implications for the nature of the burning.

SECTION

Methods

PARAGRAPH

A total of four representative scoria droplets or fragments was selected from one posthole following water flotation (Fig. 1B).

The scoria particles were mounted under vacuum in epoxy and polished for scanning electron microscopy, electron microprobe, and laser ablation analyses (Fig. 2).

The methods used in this study are largely similar to those used by Thy et al. (2015).

PARAGRAPH

The scanning electron microscope (SEM) images and electron microprobe (EMP) analyses were done at the Electron Microprobe Laboratory at University of California at Davis using a CAMECA SX-100 instrument equipped with five wavelength dispersive spectrometers (WDS) and back-scattered electron (BSE) imaging facilities.

The BSE images were used to view the internal fabric and to locate clean glass for quantitative WDS analyses.

The analytical conditions were an acceleration voltage of 15 kV, a beam current of 7 nA, peak counting times of 10 or 20 s, and a 10 μm raster length.

Natural minerals and glasses were used as standards.

Two synthetic Corning glasses (Brill, 1999) were analyzed concurrently as a control and measure of precision and accuracy (Table 1).

The analytical precision is estimated at 1–3% for major oxides and increases for low concentration oxides to 5% or more, with a lower limit of detection at 0.01 wt%.

The results are reported in Table 1 as averages and the standard deviation at the 1σ level.

All iron is given as total Fe2O3.

PARAGRAPH

Laser ablation, inductively coupled plasma, mass spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS) analyses for trace elements were done at AGiR (Aarhus Geochemistry and Isotope Research platform) using an Agilent Technologies 7900 quadrupole ICP-MS coupled to a Resonetics 193-nm laser.

The carrier gas was He and the laser parameters were set at 80.2 mJ, 10 Hz pulse frequency, and a 60-μm spot size.

Data acquisition was done for 50 s, following 25 s background analyses.

Because it was not possible to identify clean glass in the laser, the results in Table 2 represent averages of 4–7 replicate spots in the visual solid parts of the droplets.

The results were reduced off-line using USGS synthetic glass standard GSE-1G as the calibration standard and by matching the 28Si counts to the SiO2 concentrations obtained on the glasses by the electron microprobe (Table 1).

GSD-1G (Jochum et al., 2005; Guillong et al., 2005) was used as internal standard and accuracy obtained from 6 repeats are reported in Table 2.

SECTION

Results

PARAGRAPH

The droplets are made of greyish-green, semi-transparent glass as singular vesicles to irregular bulbous masses of vesicles.

The mounted scoria fragments, scoria A, B, C and D, are shown in Fig. 2 as BSE images.

The most remarkable finding is the nearly perfect silicate bubble that makes up scoria A (Fig. 2A).

It is about 1.3 mm in diameter made up of a large inner gas vesicle and a thin mainly silicate wall up to 170 μm thick.

A couple of smaller segments are missing probably due to loss during preparation and polishing.

The wall is made up of dominating rounded quartz and occasionally orthoclase and iron oxide grains interspersed in a mounting matrix of silicate glass, small secondary vesicles, and carbonaceous veins and grains.

The three other fragments (scoria B, C and D) are larger (1.5–3 mm) and have thicker walls again made up of irregular vesicles and large (<500 μm) rounded quartz and orthoclase grains (Fig. 2B, C, D).

A single zircon grain (40 μm) is seen adhered by glass to the outer surface of scoria B (Fig. 2B).

The vesicles vary from minute sizes in glass to large rounded now variously filled by either air, epoxy, or clay mixtures and walled by bounding glass and rounded mineral sand grains.

Carbonaceous material is present throughout all fragments as individual grains, penetrating veins, and partial vesicle fillings (Fig. 3).

One of the fragments is attached to a large lump of charred material (area labelled “char” on Fig. 2D).

An examination of a site-related soil found the same grains of rounded quartz as seen in the scoria.

PARAGRAPH

The electron microprobe analyses of the scoria glass are summarized in Table 1.

The individual fragments show large variation for most oxides reaching high relative standard deviations well above 30% (Table 3) caused by glass heterogeneity.

The exceptions are SiO2 and K2O that both show a consistent pattern for all the scoria.

The dominating oxides are SiO2 (67–69%) and K2O (11–14%) making up about 82% of the total mass.

Minor oxides are in decreasing importance CaO, MgO, Na2O, Al2O3, Fe2O3, P2O5, and MnO.

Chlorine is consistently below the detection limit.

The average composition for the charred material adhering to scoria D reveals, after being normalized carbon-free, the same features as the scoria glass with high SiO2 and K2O.

It differs by higher Al2O3 and Fe2O3, and particularly higher Cl concentration (Table 3).

PARAGRAPH

The trace element concentrations vary widely as also seen for the major and minor elements (Table 2).

Despite the ability of the laser ablation method to produce precise and accurate results for standard glasses (Table 2), the heterogeneity of the scoria and particularly our inability to identify individual minerals or components only allow for average bulk analyses.

Despite this difficulty, there are some common features shared by the three analyzed fragments (scoria A, B, and D) such as high Cu and Zn and alkali elements (Ba, Rb, and Sr).

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

The presence of glass in the scoria is an indication that melting was involved in their formation.

The glass appears as an adhesive, binding rounded quartz and minor orthoclase sand grains together without indications that these grains were affected by high temperature, such as by marginal melting or reactions.

The silicate and heavy-mineral (e.g., Fe-oxides and zircon) grains are typical for the alluvial glacial melt water deposits in the area and the topsoil on which the iron-age settlement was built.

The dominating silicate mineral present both in the topsoil and the scoria is a low-temperature polymorph of quartz; thus the heating event that formed the silicate melt, now preserved as glass, either persisted for a short duration and/or only reached temperatures below the quartz-tridymite transition at ~870 °C (Fig. 4).

It is thus clear that the scoria formed during a melting event, which affected the source material heterogeneously causing only melting of a fine-grained and well-mixed matrix without affecting the main sandy quartz and orthoclase grains.

SECTION

Formation

PARAGRAPH

The conspicuous presence of large vesicles (or gas bubbles) in the scoria is an indication that a gas phase developed during heating and is also the reason for the capture of the scoria fragments during flotation sorting of the soil.

The probable source of the evolved gas is the breakdown of clays, carbonates, or biomass material.

The volume of the evolved gas phase (H2O-CO-CO2-CH4) is strongly dependent on the source or a combination of source and temperature, the latter of which caused an exponential expansion of the gas volume with increasing temperature resulting in vesiculation during melting.

Thy et al. (2015) evaluated the expansion of an evolved gas as a function of temperature for Syrian house fire scoria calculating a strong volume expansion at 1000 °C to about 20 cubic meters per kilo of biomass.

PARAGRAPH

For the Tovstrup scoria, the smaller and secondary gas vesicles probably formed during cooling by exsolution by a gas initially dissolved in the melt phase.

The preservation of carbonaceous components in the glass is convincing evidence that its formation included partial decomposition of organic material during heating.

Reports of preserved glass in residual ash and slag involving the decomposition of organic-rich material are abundant (Baker and Baker, 1963; Zeuner, 1959; Thy et al., 1995; Folk and Hoops, 1982; Baker, 1968).

Milton and Davidson (1946) described what was attributed to the result of a haystack fire as a silicic glass containing large and small gas vesicles, occasional quartz grains, and linearly distributed carbonaceous particles.

Both the microscopic features as well as the composition described by Milton and Davidson (1946) show similarities to the matrix glass in the Tovstrup scoria.

Many of the silicic spherical particles described by Baker (1968) to “… have spiralled up and away from the seat of the fire in hot gases rising from …” a burning haystack (p. 1013) are in particular similar in shape to Tovstrup bubble in scoria sample A (Fig. 2A).

There are no indications for rotational teardrop and dumb-bell shapes indicative of rotational movement in a gas stream (Baker, 1968; Thy et al., 2015).

The vesicles in the Tovstrup scoria have largely spherical (Fig. 2A) to bulky irregular (Fig. 2B to D) shapes, including some of the latter closely associated with charred material (Fig. 2D).

All are associated with abundant sandy particles, similar to those found in unaffected local topsoil, and held together by a glassy silicic adhesive.

Thus the Tovstrup material differs from the pure glass particles observed from combustion of organic haystack material (Milton and Davidson, 1946; Baker and Baker, 1963; Baker, 1968; Folk and Hoops, 1982), but show similarities to the residual combustion glasses resulting from combustion of mixtures of soil and residual cattle manure accumulations (Zeuner, 1959; Thy et al., 1995) or from composite wall daub probably made from a mixture of chaff and straw from threshing, topsoil, and livestock manure (Webley, 2008, p. 53ff).

PARAGRAPH

The preservation of carbonaceous material in the glass attests to the restricted availability of oxygen (or air) during decomposition of the organic components.

Organic material decomposes following dehydration by forming an evolved gas phase with the amount of residual carbon (char) controlled by the availability of oxygen.

The preservation of carbon in the Tovstrup scoria records burning during low oxygen activity and restricted air-flow.

Vitrified straw material (‘straw-silica glass') described by Milton and Davidson (1946) contains what appears to be similar carbonaceous grains to those seen in the Tovstrup scoria; however Younger Dryas Syrian scoria fragments, otherwise similar, lack carbonaceous grains (Thy et al., 2015).

Zeuner's (1959) detailed petrographic study of Indian ash mounds noted the presence of varying amounts of ‘unburnt organic matter’ in the centers of slag lumps.

He suggests that insufficient oxygen was available in the centers, whilst on the outside an excess of air was available.

Other occurrences of vitrified straw or cattle manure do not suggest the presence of carbonaceous grains embedded in the glass (Vélain, 1878; Fenner, 1940; Baker and Gaskin, 1946; Thy et al., 1995; Jacobson et al., 2003).

SECTION

Melting temperature

PARAGRAPH

Straw and manure biomass decomposition is, following dehydration, typically initiated at 250–375 °C by breakdown of cellulose followed by breakdown of lignin at 375–600 °C (see Gani and Naruse, 2007; Burhenne et al., 2013; Giudicianni et al., 2013; Thy et al., 2017).

Thus, decomposition of organic material can be expected to have been completed at 600 °C, suggesting a minimum temperature estimate.

Char formation was initiated at temperature of 200–300 °C being stable in a low oxygen environment to very high temperatures.

PARAGRAPH

Further information on melting temperature can be obtained from comparing the ash or glass compositions to simplified equilibrium phase diagrams.

The composition of the glass component in the scoria amounts to about 82% of the total mass in the binary SiO2-K2O diagram (Kracek et al., 1937).

The liquidus for this system in Fig. 4 shows where melt is in equilibrium with the indicated minerals (quartz, tridymite and cristobalite, respectively).

The minimum melting point of quartz and potassium disilicate in equilibrium with melt occurs at 780 °C.

For the system SiO2-Na2O, the melting curve defines a very similar minimum melting point at 800 °C (Kracek, 1930).

Likewise, the ternary K2O-SiO2-Na2O (Kracek, 1932) suggests minimum melting points as low as 640 °C.

The similarities in the liquidus melting curves for the two alkali elements support the view that the total of the alkali metal oxides (R2O) can be combined, thus increasing the total mass to 84% of the simplified system.

The average scoria glass plots relatively close to the position of the minimum melting point in the simplified system (~75% SiO2) implying a possible minimum melting temperature for the scoria of ~ 800C.

Constraints of the maximum temperature may be inferred from this diagram given that the stability of low temperature quartz is <867 °C.

The absence in the scoria of high-temperature quartz polymorphs, therefore, may indicate that the melting temperature did not exceed 870 °C (see further discussion below).

PARAGRAPH

This analysis can be expanded to the ternary systems K2O-SiO2-CaO and K2O-SiO2-Al2O3 (Morey et al., 1930; Schairer and Bowen, 1955).

Fig. 5 shows the simplified liquidus relations of parts of these two systems.

The K2O-SiO2-CaO system (Fig. 5A) represents 90% of the total mass of the scoria glass, while K2O-SiO2-Al2O3 (Fig. 5B) represent 85% of the total mass.

In both systems, the glass compositions appears to be best associated with the three-phase eutectic minimum melting point where alkali silicates coexist with quartz and melt at 700 and 710 °C, respectively.

The glass compositions, however, for both diagrams cluster away from the eutectics within the tridymite field at temperatures of 975–1150 °C, distanced from the minimum eutectic melting point.

This observation suggests higher temperatures than based on the binary diagram (Fig. 4).

PARAGRAPH

The natural soil and ash/glass compositions define complex multicomponent systems that may not necessarily be well represented by the simplified binary (Fig. 4) or ternary (Fig. 5) systems.

Most problematic is the oxides P2O5 (1.5%), FeO (1.5%), and MgO (3.5%) that were not incorporated into the simplified analyses.

Information on the detailed phase relations in the complex multicomponent system is not available; however, information by expanding the binary K2O-SiO2 to ternary systems (Kracek, 1932; Faust, 1936; Roedder, 1951, 1952) suggests corresponding invariant melting points at 640 °C (Na2O), 715 °C (MgO), <770 °C (FeO), and ~750 °C (Fe2O3), similar to the estimates (710 °C, 750 °C) from Fig. 5.

The role of P2O5 is uncertain because of the possibility that this oxide may form a molten melt at high temperature or may substitute for SiO2 in some silicate minerals and/or melts (Thy et al., 2006a; Lindberg et al., 2013).

PARAGRAPH

Despite that the freezing point depression in the multicomponent system is unknown, the evidence from ternary systems appears to suggest a minimum melting point of 700–750 °C and continued melting along a pseudo-divariant phase boundary to say 1000–1150 °C.

It is important to realize that these estimates are minimum temperatures since none of the glasses examined can be constrained by coexisting melt and mineral phases.

Although quartz and orthoclase are present, none of these appear to have been in equilibrium with the melt.

PARAGRAPH

The low quartz-tridymite transition occurs at about 870 °C in the simplified systems (Figs. 4 and 5).

Potentially, this could define maximum temperature of the melting event.

A study of rice straw ash by Thy et al. (2006b) showed that cristobalite appeared between 720 and 770 °C and was replaced by tridymite above 1125 °C; thus, reversing the crystallization order of tridymite and cristobalite and without indications for low-temperature quartz as shown by the simplified systems.

PARAGRAPH

A preliminary X-ray diffraction study (not shown) of the site topsoil suggests the presence of low-quartz without indications for higher temperature polymorphs.

Although we have no direct determination of the structural state of the quartz grains in the scoria fragments, it is reasonable to suggest that these are also low-quartz based on their optical and topical similarity to the grains in the topsoil and the lack of any indications for marginal melting and reactions.

Besides the indication that the observed quartz grains were not in equilibrium with the melt, this line of evidence does not help us further to constrain the temperature of the melting event.

This reason could be two-fold, either the melting event did not reach temperatures above 800–900 °C or it was of a too short duration to affect the sand particles.

SECTION

Source material and fingerprinting

PARAGRAPH

The material partially melted and preserved in the scoria was likely made-up of a man-made, well-mixed, fine-grained composite of topsoil and various organic components interspersed among large sand grains of mostly quartz.

The proportions of the potential components will be reflected by the glass composition, although practical evaluations are restricted by the poorly known compositions of most of the relevant components.

A tentative interpretation is shown in Fig. 6, using present-day compositions of oak, barley, and sheep manure ashes, all extracted from the PHYLLIS2 database of biomass characterizations.

The soil composition is, lacking alternatives, the global average continental crust (Rudnick and Gao, 2003).

PARAGRAPH

The major oxide content of the scoria (Table 1), such as the low Al2O3, Fe2O3, and Na2O, indicate that only a modest soil contributed to the scoria given that these oxides typically are high in soil and low in organic material.

The topsoil composition at the Tovstrup site is unknown; however, a proxy is the average continental crust that suggests that the relevant topsoil may have been relatively enriched in SiO2 (and depleted in K2O) to match scoria glass compositions (adjusted composition in Fig. 6A).

This is not an unreasonable assumption considering the quartz-rich sandy soil of the vicinity of the site.

Madsen and Nørnberg (1995) examined a similar soil type east of the site that contained large amounts of quartz with minor feldspars and a clay fraction (<2 μm) of about 4–5%.

PARAGRAPH

Attempts to melt the topsoil using a differential thermal analyzer and air as the carrier gas failed to detect signs of sintering or melting to temperatures of 1200 °C (results not shown); eliminating the presence of high amounts of topsoil in the source material.

The soil, having a weight loss to 1200 °C of <2%, did not show sign of decomposition of organic components, but did reveal a small endothermic reaction at 567 °C, attributed to the loss of hydroxyl from kaolinite and/or clay minerals (Grim and Rowland, 1942).

PARAGRAPH

The compositions of sheep manure and oak ashes are poorly known (Table 3).

The PHYLLIS2 database only contains one analysis of each of these essential biomasses for an Iron Age settlement in central Jutland.

Only for modern day barley straw are there a reasonable number of analyses available.

The interpretation in Fig. 6, nevertheless, suggests that the scoria glass formed from melting of a combination of soil, barley straw, and restricted oak wood.

There is no compelling evidence that sheep manure should have been a component based on the available compositions.

PARAGRAPH

Least-squares, linear mixing calculations based on the compositions of the Tovstrup scoria and the relevant source compositions, suggests a mixture of 60% oak, <1% sheep manure, 37% barley, and 3% soil (measured on an ash basis).

The mixing constraints are, although high, reasonable for the oxides attributed to the organic component (ΣR2 = 1.6), but are poor for the remaining oxides mostly attributed to the soil component (ΣR2 = 12).

Only a better knowledge of the composition of the various components may improve the modeling.

PARAGRAPH

The estimated ash proportions can be recast to the original proportions making up the melted material by using reasonable ash contents to 70% barley, 3% soil, and 27% oak (on a dry biomass basis).

These proportions can be further expanded to a volume basis, again by using reasonable assumptions of porosity and particle shapes (bulk density) to 82% barley and 18% oak or dominating barley depending on the choice of bulk density.

The actual soil component in the material subjected to partial melting is much higher than inferred from the composition of the glass in the scoria since the sandy components of quartz and orthoclase must be included in the evaluations.

A large content of mainly quartz grains can be predicted from the scoria (Fig. 2), as well as from the results of Madsen and Nørnberg (1995), recasting the volume proportions to say 50% sandy soil, 41% barley straw, and 9% oak branches.

PARAGRAPH

The composition of the Tovstrup scoria glass compares relatively well to observations of Iron Age scoria from southern African (Fig. 6), attributed to burning of cattle manure or sorghum and millet straw (Thy et al., 1995; Jacobson et al., 2003; Denbow et al., 2008; Huffman et al., 2013).

This suggests commonalities in their origins involving straw and/or manure with variable soil component; the latter perhaps in part due to sampling of complex poorly mixed deposits (Jacobson et al., 2003).

PARAGRAPH

The trace elements likewise record the melted source, although an interpretation is complicated by two factors: (1) the obtained analyses are recording the bulk scoria and not the glass composition and (2) the trace element compositions of the various components mixed into the source are largely unknown (Vassilev et al., 2014).

The average trace element contents for the three scoria fragments are given in Table 2 and supplemented with some of the major elements are illustrated in Fig. 7, normalized to the same soil composition used in the above discussion.

The patterns of the normalized elements reveal many features that can be attributed to the incorporation of biomass into the scoria.

The elements with noticeable higher concentrations than soil (> 1) are K that can be attributed to most biomass ashes; Mg, P, Ca, Mn, Cu, Zn, Rb, Mn, and Mo that can be attributed to wood ash, Si, Mg, Ca, Rb, Sr, Ba, most transition metals, rare earth elements (REE), and the heavy elements that can be attributed to cereal straw and grass ashes (Thy et al., 2013a).

Few biomasses contain noticeable Al and Fe.

The observed pattern thus indicates a mixture of wood ash (P, K, Mn, Cu, Zn, Rb, and Mo) and straw ash (ScNi, REE), but with restricted soil (Al) components.

The only element that does not easily fit this pattern is, for unknown reasons, Ba (Fig. 7).

PARAGRAPH

The compositions of Iron Age biomass are unknown and probably beyond our reach.

The interpretation above is based on modern-day wood (Sierra Nevadan Douglas fir), straw (Californian rice and wheat straw), and, as pointed out, normalized to an average global continental soil.

These assumptions may be reasonable, considering that biomass often falls into certain defined compositional groups (Vassilev et al., 2010, 2014; Thy et al., 2013a, 2013b), but, however, may not allow any detailed interpretation as well as local environmental and anthropogenic factors to be evaluated.

PARAGRAPH

The best choice of source for melting may be represented by the charred material to which scoria D is attached (Fig. 2D).

The bulk composition of this material (Table 3) compares to the glass compositions, particularly as far as the oxide mainly attributed to the biomass (K2O), but less so for the oxides attributed to a soil component (SiO2, TiO2, Al2O3, Na2O, and Fe2O3), suggesting that the soil component was partially retained in the residual fraction.

The presence of 3–4% chlorine in the charred material, probably in form of mostly sylvite (K-chloride), and the lack of chlorine in the scoria glass suggests temperatures above decomposition of sylvite of above 1000 °C (Thy et al., 2006b), well above the melting point of pure sylvite at 770 °C.

The lack of chlorine in the scoria glass thus gives us an additional maximum temperature constrain.

SECTION

Archaeological context and implications

PARAGRAPH

The evidence gained from observations from the scoria slag points toward the partial melting of a mixture of mainly soil and straw material, with a minor contribution of wood.

This would appear to exclude burning and collapsing of a turf covered roof as well as a straw thatched roof.

The best plausible source material is a building wall made of a wattle of woven oak braches covered by a daub made of a mixture of the local sandy soil and residual cereal chaff or straw from harvest threshing; although it was expected that at least some manure would have been used to make the daub mixture.

The burning and partial melting of such a wall can explain main features of the slag (framework of quartz grains and the dominating straw component of the glass).

The low amount of a wooden component in the glass, despite a much larger volume in the wall, can be attributed to the layering and preferential burning of daub leaving the wood component charred.

PARAGRAPH

The temperature estimates for the burning and melting are inferred by simplified binary and ternary equilibria phase diagrams, making-up 85–90% of the total mass, from a minimum melting point at 700–800 °C, just about 100 °C above completion of the thermal decomposition of organic material, and to have extended to 1000 or even as high as 1150 °C (Figs. 4 and 5).

This approach of using phase diagrams does not allow us to constrain the upper range that may better be constrained by the apparent preservation of low quartz (<870 °C) and the loss of chlorine by decomposition of salt (>1000 °C).

Such temperatures are within the ranges expected from archaeological as well as modern house fires, iron smelting, blacksmithing, ceramic kilns, coal and biomass firing (see discussion by Thy et al., 2015).

PARAGRAPH

There is no direct indication for the reason for the burning, but it seems to have been intentional, since the house was cleared of household goods before the fire.

A partially burned wattle and daub/clay wall sealed off the floor layer (Fig. 1B), and no pottery, charred remains of wooden items or other significant artifacts were found underneath.

At least one of the roof bearing posts had fallen on top of the collapsed wall.

When the fallen post burned, the daub in the wall underneath it hardened, preserving the imprint of the post as a red, trough shaped indentation of burned clay in the washed out clay layer remaining from the fallen wall.

It is not clear, whether the fire was set to clear the area, or if it might have been more ritual in nature, as is custom in some indigenous cultures (Chapman, 1999; Webley, 2008, p. 55 ff.; Huffman, 2009).

Either way, if the fire was intentional, it might indicate some control or attempt to control the airflow and temperature, by opening or closing the doors, or by adding or removing flammable materials.

SECTION

Preservation and abundance of scoria particles

PARAGRAPH

The few detected scoria fragments reflect their preferential preservation in postholes as well the sampling flotation technique.

The fragments were preserved in postholes dugout in the burn field after an older house structure and were thus not subject to human and lifestock activities, water penetration or weathering in the soil.

The flotation sampling techniques will also limit the sizes preserved to the larger range.

PARAGRAPH

An equally important factor in restricting the abundance of scoria particles is the heterogeneous nature of firing and melting.

Localized micro-melting was restricted to interstitial areas of well mixed soil and ash mixtures in the burning wall with an ideal composition conductive to melting near to minimum conditions.

The bulk of the building walls and general structure was subjected to charring temperatures well below melting.

PARAGRAPH

An auxiliary outcome of this study is the proposal that broader size-ranges of scoria could be present in burn fields from archaeological houses than indicated in the literature, perhaps to within the micro-range observed in straw burn fields (Baker, 1968).

The rare reporting of silicate scoria particles may simply reflect that these are not routinely looked for and/or the extraction techniques may not be ideal for their discovery.

SECTION

Conclusions

PARAGRAPH

Silicate scoria fragments are found at a Store Tovstrup pre-Roman to Roman longhouse site in western Jutland, Denmark.

They were recovered from postholes of a late Roman longhouse (~100 CE), but are associated with the burning of a pre-Roman structure dated at about 500–100 BCE.

The association of bubbled-up silicate glass containing quartz sand particles and charred material suggests formation as a result of burning principally of daub covering a wattle of woven oak branches.

The glass compositions and trace element content of the scoria suggest that the main components contributing to the daub was the local sandy soil, cereal straw, and oak wood components, but with restricted contributions from livestock manure.

The main component from the soil appears as unreacted quartz sand particles.

PARAGRAPH

The burning exceeded the about 350–600 °C required to decompose the organic components, like cereal straws, with a minimum melting temperature constrained by simplified ternary phase diagrams (700–750 °C).

The maximum temperature is difficult to constrain, but there is indications that it may have been as high as 1000–1150 °C from the ternary diagrams.

Such high temperatures are also supported by the disappearance of salt in the scoria compared to the charred daub (>1000 °C).

The preservation of unreacted low-quartz in the scoria, however, may constrain the maximum temperature to below 870 °C, although it is possible that burning and melting were related to a short-lived event without allowing equilibration and reactions to affect the quartz grains.

PARAGRAPH

The melting event that formed the scoria may in part have been concurrent with the late stage decomposition of the straw material in the daub to allow the formation of evolved gases and firestorm fueling vesicle-formation in the melt.

The melting event occurred heterogeneously in restricted locations in the interstitial, fine-grained material between quartz sand particles.

The preservation of carbon or graphite grains in the scoria glass suggests locally a restricted airflow insufficient to fully oxidize carbon.

The main mass of the structure succumbed to the fire at much lower temperatures in the range of char formation and decomposition of the organic material below 600 °C.

However, because large volumes of charred material were found along the southern wall, as well as associated with some of the scoria fragments, the preservation of carbon in the glass may not negate the main conclusion from the archaeological observations that the burning was intentionally lit and fed.