10.1016/j.jasrep.2018.11.037

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Post-Linear Pottery cultural boundary and repopulation of the German Rhineland: Revisiting the Western contacts hypothesis

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

The Neolithic developed in temperate Europe with the Linear Pottery Culture (hereafter, LPC, second half of 6th millennium) and spread from Transdanubia (Hungary) to the Paris Basin (France).

In Central-Western Europe, it was characterized by substantial uniformity in architecture, ceramic styles, and funerary practices, to name only a few.

At the turn of the sixth and fifth millennium BC, a historical turning point occurred in continental neolithization of Europe as the Linear Pottery culture broke up into a mosaic of cultural entities.

The northern half of France and Belgium were occupied by the Blicquy/Villeneuve-Saint-Germain culture (BQY/VSG).

The BQY group was initially discovered in Belgium (two areas, Hainaut in western Belgium and Hesbaye in eastern Belgium) while VSG group was recognized in France; however, their chrono-cultural characteristics, strongly inherited from LPC, are quite similar (Constantin, 1985).

In west Germany, the first post-LPC occupations are linked to the emergence of the Hinkelstein culture on the middle and upper Rhine regions which was followed by the Grossgartach then Planig-Friedberg and Rössen cultures (see Fig. 1).

The Aldenhoven Plateau, in the north-western studied part of Germany, hasn't delivered sites from the beginning of this Middle Neolithic sequence (German chronology).

These Middle Neolithic Rhineland cultural entities are partially contemporaneous from the Blicquy/Villeneuve-Saint-Germain culture (e. g. Constantin and Ilett, 1998; Gehlen and Schön, 2007; Nowak, 2013; Zimmermann et al., 2006) and are approximately dated from 4950/4900 to 4750/4650 BCE.

PARAGRAPH

Here, we focus on the north part of this area (see boxed region in Fig. 1) as three main sources of Cretaceous flint are located in this region (Cahen et al., 1986; De Grooth, 2011; Robaszynski, 1995).

The Mons Basin (West Belgium) is located 15–20 km south of the BQY sites of West Belgium and has produced a large amount of diverse raw material associated with different Cretaceous layers.

Ghlin flint (unknown layer) is the most preferred raw material exploited by the Early Neolithic populations of West Belgium (Allard, 2005; Cahen et al., 1986; Denis, 2017).

Alternative flint outcrops of the region include a variety of flint-bearing Upper Cretaceous Campanian formations including Obourg, Nouvelles and Spiennes flint (Moreau et al., 2016).

The Neolithic populations of the Aldenhoven Plateau largely utilized flint sources located in the Limbourg and surrounded regions (Netherlands and its borders with Belgium and Germany), with the two most exploited raw materials being the Rijckholt and the Rullen flints of Upper Cretaceous Maastrichtian age (Gulpen formation, Lanaye Member) (De Grooth, 2011).

An additional potential flint procurement area is the Lower Rhineland region around Düsseldorf which corresponds to the southernmost extension of erratic Baltic flint (Floss, 1994).

The quality of the different flints can be evaluated from the point of view of its clastic properties: presence and frequency of inclusions, homogeneity and delicacy of the grain.

PARAGRAPH

In the area concerned here, the Linear Pottery occupation area extended from the Belgian Hesbaye, through Dutch Limburg, to the regions of the German Lower Rhine (Fig. 1).

Diffusion networks of lithic raw materials suggest the emergence of a boundary between two regions.

In fact, circulation network curves of Campanian flint from Hesbaye and Rijckholt flint show a reciprocal collapse phenomenon as the proportion of fine-grained flint from Hesbaye (Campanian) decreases between 10 and 35 km from the outcrops while Rijkholt flint increases (Allard, 2005; Zimmermann, 1995) (Fig. 2).

PARAGRAPH

At the end of the Linear Pottery culture, marked by a breakdown of these large diffusion networks (Allard and Denis, 2015), this boundary asserts itself and becomes the geographical and cultural border between BQY/VSG populations in Belgium and Grossgartach/Planig-Friedberg populations of Aldenhoven Plateau (Fig. 1).

In addition, the end of the Linear Pottery Culture is accompanied by a drastic demographic decline in the Rhineland region (Balkowski, 2017; Zimmermann et al., 2006; Zimmermann, 2009).

The first sites linked to the repopulation of this geographic area are attributed to people representing the middle Grossgartach stage after a probable hiatus in the occupation.

The geographic origin of which is located further south, in the regions of the Upper Rhine in southwestern Germany (Fig. 1).

This raises the question of a single origin of the first post-Linear Pottery culture populations in the German Rhineland.

Indeed, several elements indicate the existence of contacts between populations of Aldenhoven Plateau and Blicquian ones further to the West in the form of Blicquian shards discovered at two sites (Spatz, 1991).

Moreover, study of the post-LPC lithic assemblages at these sites highlight the presence of Belgian Campanien Hesbaye flint and several diagnostic BQY/VSG tools (Denis, in press; Gehlen and Schön, 2007, 2009).

The alleged presence of Obourg black flint at some post-LPC sites of Aldenhoven area has also been used to support the hypothesis of intensive relationships with populations from Belgium, more precisely from West Belgium (Gehlen and Schön, 2007, 2009).

Despite the fact that populations from this area themselves did not use this raw material, apart from two pieces discovered in habitat unit 10 at the site of Irchonwelz “la Bonne Fortune” (Denis, 2017).

PARAGRAPH

Uncertainty surrounding the identification of black flint clearly hinders our comprehension of the diffusion mechanisms of this material and the anthropological interpretation of its presence in post-Linear Pottery sites in Belgium and Western Germany.

Does it come from regional procurement?

Is this raw material exogenous and where does it outcrop?

This study provides an answer to the first using technological analysis.

A more robust geochemical study will be needed to answer the second.

Broadly, the analysis of raw material origins and diffusion networks contribute insights into the procurement area of these populations and possible interactions between groups.

To this end, it is essential to differentiate between diverse raw materials with multiple lines of evidence as macroscopic observation alone is here limited.

Following from a recent study validating the use of geochemical characterization of Western Belgian flint to test archaeological hypotheses (Moreau et al., 2016), the approach used in this paper combines geochemical analysis and technological study of flint industry.

The novel method of investigation is applied to black flint artefacts discovered at the sites from the beginning of the Middle Neolithic on the Aldenhoven Plateau and its surroundings.

Our aim is to determine whether the use of this raw material by these populations resulted from the direct acquisition of a material available in the region or through the acquisition of an exogenous material, thought to come from the Mons Basin, nearly 200 km from the sites.

SECTION

Setting

PARAGRAPH

On the Aldenhoven Plateau and the surrounding area, four sites are attributed to the beginning of the Middle Neolithic cultures (Gehlen and Schön, 2009): Hasselweiler 1, Langweiler 10, Hambach 260 and Langweiler 12.

In the literature, flint described as Obourg appears to be identified at Hasselweiler 1 (Schwitalla, 1997), but unfortunately, we were unable to find the lithic assemblage from this site.

At Langweiler 10, no black flint was discovered.

Therefore, this article focuses on two post-Linear Pottery sites Langweiler 12 (Ihmig et al., 1971) and Hambach 260 (Dohrn-Ihmig, 1983) where 21 artefacts made of Cretaceous black flint have been discovered.

The two sites are only about ten kilometres apart.

The two occupations are partially contemporaneous and are chronologically positioned between 4800 and 4750 BCE, corresponding to the Planig-Friedberg cultural phase (Gehlen and Schön, 2009).

The village of Hambach 260 yielded several earlier pits attributed to the Grossgartch (4850–4800 BCE), whereas the occupation of the Langweiler 12 enclosure seems to persist until the beginning of the Rössen culture (4750–4700 BCE).

PARAGRAPH

The black flint found at these sites is extremely homogenous with very fine, almost greasy texture.

It is of exceptional quality and is often classified as Western Belgian Obourg flint (Weiner, 2005).

However, as shown by Nowak (2014), Obourg flint was not used by the Early Neolithic populations from the neighbouring Western Belgium (Allard, 2005; Denis, 2017).

De Grooth thus suggested an alternative explanation that highlights the macroscopic similarities of Obourg flint and flint from the levels of Zeven Wegen (2011).

The latter flint outcrop exists in small quantities and is associated with the flint deposits of Rullen (Albers and Felder, 1999), which are located about 30 km from the Hambach 260 and Lagnweiler 12 sites.

Rullen flint derives from residual loams of the Lanaye Member and is a grey to yellow fine-grained flint, mostly translucent with many inclusions (De Grooth, 2011).

Previous research has demonstrated that Rullen flint was widely exploited by the Middle Neolithic populations of the Aldenhoven Plateau (Gehlen and Schön, 2007, 2009; Nowak, 2014).

SECTION

Material and method

SECTION

Material

PARAGRAPH

Hambach 260 yields 260 flint artefacts (or about 1900 g) and Langweiler 12 yields 117 pieces (nearly 1600 g).

At the former site, nine pieces of black flint were discovered, representing 3.5% of the entire assemblage.

The majority of black flint artefacts came from structures 1606 and 183, which are attributed to the Grossgartach.

Another piece, discovered in pit 761, was less confidently attributed to this same black flint and is the only piece from the Planig-Friedberg phase.

Therefore, almost all of the black flint discovered at Hambach 260 comes from archaeological structures attributed to the Grossgartach.

However, this chronological phase is not represented at Langweiler 12, where 10% of the black flint discovered (12 pieces) is attributable to the Planig-Friedberg or early Rössen phases.

Five artefacts made of black flint were selected for geochemical analyses.

Three are from the site of Hambach 260 and two pieces from the site of Langweiler 12.

SECTION

Method

SECTION

Techno-economic analysis of the material

PARAGRAPH

The techno-economic analysis applied to these lithic artefacts aims to determine the production's chaîne opératoire (Tixier, 2012).

Each of the artefacts is attributed to a stage of the chaîne opératoire in order to identify how the raw material was brought to the sites (Perlès, 1990).

Moreover, the in-depth examination of the debitage method and percussion techniques contributes to establishing the technical identity of the knappers.

To better define the concept of technical identity, the level of knapping skills requires consideration.

The study conducted by Eren et al. (2011) raises questions about the difficulty of identifying different levels of know-how in an archaeological series.

However, in the case of Neolithic laminar productions, which involve a succession of predetermined removals, objectives/intentions of the production are obvious which allows for assessing the level of know-how (Pelegrin, 1990).

Indeed, it is therefore possible to detect the evidence of awkwardness, accidents or illusory ambitions that would “disfigure” the level of standard know-how expected for the determined intentions (Pelegrin, 1990).

By the same way, high levels of skill can be also recognized.

The most common criteria for determining a high level of skill, in contrast to unskilled knappers, are well synthesized in Bamforth and Finlay (2008:5–6).

In addition, Eren et al. (2011) illustrates perfectly the pertinence of the accident's criterion: “The two knappers were clearly distinguished by their overshot frequencies.

This is at least a blunt marker of skill, possibly a sensitive one” (Eren et al., 2011 244–245:).

Here, our aim is not to identify individuals knappers but establishing a gradation of the level of know-how between and within the different productions to better figure out the technical identity of the knappers according to general qualitative and quantitative criteria, such as the observation of accidents, technical errors, and the regularity of knapping products.

Furthermore, a detailed examination of the blades, based on a description of the butts, the section and debitage organization, and especially on the technical processes of preparation through to removal and percussion techniques allows for the identification of “ways of doing things” (Pelegrin, 1995: 36).

“Technical behaviors are transmitted by observation and are reinforced and stabilized by effective repetition.

In this way, the conditions of acquisition convey a certain inertia on technical skills, by respecting common standards and habits.

This justifies the term “technical tradition”, the sum of shared and transmitted choices […]” (Pelegrin, 1985: 83).

The study of skill level and technical traditions is still underexploited for Neolithic lithic assemblages.

However, they reflect distinct social groups (Roux, 2010), and tracking them in time and space enhances our understanding of the actors of neolithization and their interactions.

SECTION

Geochemical characterization

PARAGRAPH

LA-ICP-MS measurements were conducted at the University of Cambridge using an ESI NWR193 excimer laser ablation system interfaced to a Perkin-Elmer NexION 350D ICP-MS.

Pure helium was used as the ablation gas at a precisely controlled flow rate of 0.8 L min−1.

The helium flow carrying the ablated sample material was joined with an argon stream from the ICP-MS at 0.8 L min−1 before entering the plasma.

A 100 μm diameter laser beam and a laser repetition rate of 10 Hz and laser power of 8 J cm−1 was used for the entire study.

To identify and minimize effects of heterogeneity in the natural flint material samples, multielemental measurements were conducted at discrete locations across each lithic sample.

The 28 measured chemical elements are as follows: B, Mg, Al, Ca, Ti, V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn, Ga, Rb, Sr, Y, Zr, Nb, Cs, Ba, La, Ce, Pr, Nd, Pb, Th, U (for more details on instrumental settings see: Moreau et al., 2018).

All spots measured on the lithic artefacts were chosen carefully to ensure laser sampling from the target mineral phase only; in addition, the first 10 s of ablation signal were discarded.

Multiplying the number of laser ablation readings per sample aimed at achieving a higher confidence that the median value is representative of the underlying geochemical signature.

PARAGRAPH

To explore patterns in the elemental data, we used robust Principal Component Analysis (PCA), following previous archaeometric studies (Baxter, 2001; Glascock et al., 2004).

Raw elemental concentrations were transformed using centred log-ratios prior to multivariate analysis in order to reduce the influence of high concentration elements.

All analysis was performed in the R statistical environment (R Core Team, 2017) using the pcaCoDa function for robust principal component analysis in the robCompositions package (Templ et al., 2011).

The combination of transformed data and robust PCA has been demonstrated to deliver superior results to other approaches (Filzmoser et al., 2009).

SECTION

Results

SECTION

Results of the technological analysis of black flint artefacts

PARAGRAPH

The study of the chaîne opératoire on black flint shows that this raw material was selected to produce small blades.

Due to the rarity of shaping flakes, the techno-economic analysis of the material points to the introduction of preformed blocks or even prepared and operative cores at the sites of Hambach 260 and Langweiler 12.

Indeed, at Hambach 260, only flakes from debitage maintenance and blades have been discovered.

Two flakes from the maintenance of the striking platform show that the latter was faceted.

One flake aimed to rectify the laminar surface altered by a hinged negative of removal.

Two laminar negatives of removal display the existence of a sequence of opposite debitage.

Finally, four flakes contribute to maintaining core convexities.

Three small blades fragments with a trapezoidal section are less than 14 mm wide and 4 mm thick.

One of them is almost whole and is 40 mm long.

It probably measured less than 60 mm when it was intact.

One of them is a proximal fragment, with knapping marks showing that the debitage was carried out with indirect percussion.

It displays a very narrow and thin dihedral butt.

PARAGRAPH

At Langweiler 12, flakes from debitage maintenance are represented by one flake issued from striking platform maintenance; one flake contributing to the overrunning of the debitage on the side of the core and three flakes from the maintenance of the convexities of the laminar volume.

A very small flake (less than 15 × 15 mm) could not be accurately positioned in the chaîne opératoire.

Finished products are rare, consisting of only two blades.

One of these is a mesial blade fragment with four facets, while the other is a proximal blade fragment with three facets.

Both are relatively regular and small in size (respectively 37 × 23 × 6 mm and 18 × 11 × 3 mm).

The interpretation of the diacritic schemes of these blanks shows that the knappers used alternating arrangements for the debitage and, for one, core rotation during debitage.

This suggests the use of two opposite striking platforms, which are clearly shown on the only core made of black flint in the assemblage (Fig. 3), where three opposite debitage sequences were identified.

The striking platforms are facetted and the proximal blades shows that the knappers positioned their punch on the dihedron created by the small faceting flakes on the striking platform, using indirect percussion.

The residual blade scars on the core are less than 45 mm long and it is clearly economically depleted.

PARAGRAPH

Last but not least, the techno-economic analysis of the lithic material from the sites of Hambach 260 and Langweiler 12 suggests that black flint and Rullen flint were brought in in two different states of the chaîne opératoire (Table 1).

PARAGRAPH

The observation that the use of black flint and Rullen flint followed distinct modalities of blank production is an argument in favour of the hypothesis that those two flint types derive from distinct geographic/geological deposits.

In fact, the way black flint was introduced to the site (in form of prepared cores) is similar to the common treatment of exogenous raw materials (Perlès, 2007).

Thus, the techno-economic study of the chaîne opératoire of laminar production on black flint contradicts the hypothesis of regional procurement from the same outcrops as Rullen flint.

However, if this raw material is exogenous, could it come from the Mons Basin?

SECTION

Results of the technical identity study

PARAGRAPH

Knapping is carried out in situ after introduction of prepared cores.

Knapping methods seem quite similar at both sites with two characteristics worth mentioning.

First, the knappers often use opposite striking platforms.

Secondly, they place their punch on a dihedron before striking.

These dihedral butts result from faceting the striking platform in order to create a rib on which the knapper can put their punch.

The obtained blades are small in size.

In this way, the blow on the punch does not require much force to remove the blade.

In other words, the position of the punch on the dihedron facilitates the initialization of the fracture, hence the removal of the blade (Pelegrin, personal communication), whereas for larger blades this process would damage the punch.

The blades obtained are regular and the butts, which at times were carefully prepared, can be very narrow and thin.

According to our knowledge, this technical identity has never been identified up until now in the Blicquy/Villeneuve-Saint-Germain context (Bostyn et al., in press; Denis, 2017), nor in the LPC context in France or in Belgium (Allard, 2005).

Thus, the technical identity of the knappers of black flint might be very different from the inhabitants of the surrounding Mons Basin.

SECTION

Results of the geochemical analysis

PARAGRAPH

Results show that we can confidently exclude an attribution of the geochemically analysed lithic artefacts from Langweiler 12 and Hambach 260 to any of the geological reference groups of Campanian black flint (OB, NO and SP in Fig. 4).

Principal component 1, which explains 28.92% of the compositional variability, clearly separates the relatively homogenous geological samples from the more heterogenous, yet geochemically distinct, archaeological samples.

Archaeological samples from Langweiler 12 and Hambach 260 are most clearly differentiated from geological samples based on higher concentrations of transition and post-transition metals (Cr, Cu, Ga, Mn, Zn) as well as the rare earth element of Thorium (Th) (see Supplemental information for additional details).

One possible exception to the observed pattern is geologic flint from Zeven Wegen (ZW) (De Grooth, 2011), which shows broad geochemical similarity to archaeological flint from Langweiler 12 and Hambach 260.

However, we need to bear in mind the limited sample size for ZW flint, which consists of only six measurements from one single flake.

Accordingly, the relationship between the archaeological samples and ZW geological material has to be considered as provisional at this stage.

The geochemical variability of ZW flint will have to be refined through further analyses and will require enlarging of the sample database for the Belgian Hesbaye and Dutch Limburg regions.

SECTION

Discussion and conclusion

PARAGRAPH

The study proposed here stresses the relevance of integrated studies that combine the technological and geochemical analysis of lithic assemblages.

The results presented here lead us to question the validity of earlier hypotheses, which attribute black flint artefacts from German Rhineland to Campanian Obourg or Zeven Wegen geological sources.

Although we are well aware of sample size constraints as far as Zeven Wegen geological material is concerned, our approach rules out the attribution of black flint artefacts from German archaeological contexts to the geologic deposits of West Belgium.

This study thus minimizes the presumed Blicquian influence stemming from the diffusion of this black raw material from the west to the east but its provenance requires further investigation.

This study reiterates the urgent need to identifying the geological and geographical origin of lithic raw materials used in the prehistoric past by implementing systematic sourcing strategies and building up comprehensive regional databases of geological exposures (Moreau et al., 2016).

Two promising avenues for future research will consist of incorporating erratic Baltic flint as well as additional flint samples from the surroundings of the Meuse river basin into the reference collection.

PARAGRAPH

Our results do not support the hypothesis of intensive contact between German Middle Neolithic populations and post-LPC populations from West Belgium as suggested by previous studies based on the presence of these high-quality black flint artefacts.

However, contacts between these two cultural entities did exist, as indicated by the presence of Blicquy pottery at the Rhineland German sites.

But the study of lithic industries at those sites shows that contacts are more likely with the populations of East Belgium than of West Belgium (Denis, in press).

Nevertheless, as mentioned previously, one farmstead at the West Belgium site of Irchonwelz has delivered two pieces comparable to the black flint studied here (0.12% of the total number of pieces).

The debitage wasn't realized on site, these artefacts were introduced by diffusion.

At the present state of research, we can suggest to pinpoint the origin of diffusion toward German Middle Neolithic sites.

This farmstead is the only Blicquian ones excluded from the main diffusion networks within the Blicquy/Villeneuve-Saint-Germain culture (Denis, 2017).

This element could illustrate the quest for new alliances in a context of social and cultural reorganization after the collapse of circulation networks and the settlement at the end of the Early Neolithic (Zimmermann, 2009).

PARAGRAPH

The geochemical analysis suggests that assignment to Zeven Wegen (East Belgium/southern Netherlands) is possible with future geochemical research.

While technological analysis tends to support the hypothesis of an exogenous origin these black flint artefacts.

Considering the hypothesis of an attribution to East Belgium/southern Netherlands, the differential treatment of the two raw materials (Rullen/Zeven Wegen) coming from the same outcrops area must be explain in the future researches.

Could it signal two identity groups and where are they originated from?

The technological study of lithic assemblages from the German Rhineland by comparison with Western Belgium and the Paris Basin lead us to suspect from the outset that a western origin was unlikely.

The technical characteristics of blade production highlighted above are clearly distinct from those of the Paris Basin during and after the LPC (Allard, 2005; Bostyn, 1994; Bostyn et al., 2018; Augereau, 2004).

Unfortunately, this type of analysis has yet to be developed for post-Linear Pottery lithic assemblages from the central Lower Rhine regions, where the beginning of the Middle Neolithic populations originate from.

However, it is important to note that at the earlier sites, the striking platforms were prepared with a ‘peculiar delicate facetingʼ (Gronenborn, 1999: 169; Mateiciucová, 2008), which must be finely compared to the one observed on black flint artefacts from the German Rhineland.

Importantly, the first influxes of Baltic flint toward the central Lower Rhine are recognized during this period (Gronenborn, 1997: 114).

One of us (S.D.) is currently investigating whether the aforementioned characteristics persisted through time using a comparative technological approach on post-LPC industries from Upper Rhine regions.

Our initial observations tend to refute it.

Furthermore, one important technological element is not associated with the earlier productions, namely the use of opposite striking platforms.

This characteristic could be found in some northern Mesolithic assemblages (De Grooth, 2008), which could so have had an influence on the evolution of post-LPC technical traditions.

PARAGRAPH

Thus, the study proposed here, combining geochemical analysis and technological analysis of a material, although it must be enriched, nevertheless suggests some new insights relating to the repopulation of the German Rhineland after the dissolution of the first agro-pastoral communities.

The impact of Belgian populations seems limited and oriented toward its eastern part.

The influence of populations originated from the southern part of Germany must be important but their origin have to be precisely defined.

Finally, the technological observations made on the black flint studied could suggest the hypothesis of the participation of a third group which has to be identify.

Our future research will aim at tracking black flint artefacts and technical identity of post-LPC populations, starting with the central Lower and Upper Rhine regions from where the first post-linear pottery groups are likely to have primarily originated.

SECTION

Funding sources

PARAGRAPH

This work was supported by the Wagemann foundation, under the aegis of the Fondation de France and the Fondation Maison des Sciences de l'Homme in partnership with the Fritz Thyssen Stiftung for granting post-doctoral funding to one of us (S.D.), enabling us to study the post-Linear Pottery material from the sites of the Aldenhoven Plateau.

L.M. gratefully acknowledges support from an EC H2020 Marie Curie Individual Fellowship Grant (PALMOBI project, Grant No. 654927).