10.1016/j.jhep.2017.11.030

ABSTRACT

TITLE

A model including sarcopenia surpasses the MELD score in predicting waiting list mortality in cirrhotic liver transplant candidates: A competing risk analysis in a national cohort

PARAGRAPH

Frail patients with low model for end-stage liver disease (MELD) scores may be under-prioritised.

Low skeletal muscle mass, namely sarcopenia, has been identified as a risk factor for waiting list mortality.

A recent study proposed incorporating sarcopenia in the MELD score (MELD-Sarcopenia score).

We aimed to investigate the association between sarcopenia and waiting list mortality, and to validate the MELD-Sarcopenia score (i.e. MELD + 10.35 * Sarcopenia).

PARAGRAPH

We identified consecutive patients with cirrhosis listed for liver transplantation in the Eurotransplant registry between 2007–2014 and measured skeletal muscle mass on computed tomography.

A competing risk analysis was used to compare survival of patients with and without sarcopenia, and concordance (c) indices were calculated to assess performance of the MELD and MELD-Sarcopenia score.

We created a nomogram of the best predictive model.

PARAGRAPH

We included 585 patients with a median MELD score of 14 (interquartile range 9–19), of which 254 (43.4%) were identified as having sarcopenia.

Median waiting list survival was shorter in patients with sarcopenia than those without (p <0.001).

This effect was even more pronounced in patients with MELD ≤15.

The discriminative performance of the MELD-Sarcopenia score (c-index 0.820) for three-month mortality was lower than MELD score alone (c-index 0.839).

Apart from sarcopenia and MELD score, other predictive variables were occurrence of hepatic encephalopathy before listing and recipient age.

A model including all these variables yielded a c-index of 0.851.

PARAGRAPH

Sarcopenia was associated with waiting list mortality in liver transplant candidates with cirrhosis, particularly in patients with lower MELD scores.

The MELD-Sarcopenia score was successfully validated in this cohort.

However, incorporating sarcopenia in the MELD score had limited added value in predicting waiting list mortality.

