10.1016/j.jhep.2018.10.027

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Multidrug-resistant bacterial infections in patients with decompensated cirrhosis and with acute-on-chronic liver failure in Europe

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Bacterial infections constitute a frequent complication in patients with decompensated cirrhosis and are the most frequent trigger of acute-on-chronic liver failure (ACLF) in Western countries.1–5

Patients with cirrhosis and acute decompensation (AD) are prone to developing spontaneous and secondary bacterial infections, a risk that is magnified in patients with ACLF.1,5,6

Bacterial infection has a critical relevance in the clinical course of decompensated cirrhosis, increasing the rate of short-term mortality by 2–4 fold.7,8

Recent data also show that bacterial infections are severe and associated with intense systemic inflammation, poor clinical course and high mortality in patients with ACLF.6

PARAGRAPH

Early diagnosis and adequate empirical antibiotic therapy of bacterial infections is key in the management of cirrhotic patients.1,9

However, the epidemiology of bacterial infections is now much more complex than in the past.9

The efficacy of classical empirical antibiotic strategies based on the administration of third-generation cephalosporins has markedly decreased in the last decade because of the emergence of multidrug-resistant (MDR) bacteria.9–13

Resistance to antibiotics in pathogenic bacteria is currently a major global public health problem,14 and is particularly serious in patients with decompensated cirrhosis.

These patients frequently accumulate several risk factors for MDR organisms (MDROs) including recurrent hospitalizations, invasive procedures and repeated exposures to prophylactic or therapeutic antibiotics.9

Antibiotic overuse and failure of control measures to prevent the spread of MDROs in the healthcare setting have magnified antimicrobial resistance in cirrhosis.

Therefore, the characterization of these epidemiological changes and the identification of the MDROs that infect our cirrhotic patients are of major clinical relevance.

The great majority of the epidemiological data on antibiotic resistance in cirrhosis derives from single-center studies2,4,10–13,15–20 or from multicenter studies performed in specific countries21 or assessing specific infections.22

However, at present no study has explored the epidemiology of MDROs in large geographical, multinational regions in patients with cirrhosis and all types of infection.

These studies are essential to understand the global impact of antibiotic resistance.

PARAGRAPH

Therefore, the current study was designed to assess the prevalence of MDR bacterial infections in cirrhosis across Europe, potential epidemiological differences among regions and centers, the characteristics of these infections, their impact on prognosis, risk factors for MDR and type and efficacy of empirical antibiotic treatment using information carefully collected on bacterial infection from the Canonic Study database.5

Additionally we analyzed a more recent series to detect potential epidemiological changes.

SECTION

Patients and methods

SECTION

Study population and aims of the study

PARAGRAPH

In the current investigation, 2 prospective series were evaluated.

The first considered all patients included in the Canonic series (February to September 2011).

Fifty-three individuals with and 150 without infection with incomplete data at inclusion or during follow-up were excluded.

Therefore, 1,146 patients were analyzed, 375 with ACLF (269 diagnosed at enrolment and 106 during hospitalization) and 771 with AD.

Data on epidemiology, clinical characteristics of infections, microbiology and empirical and final antibiotic schedules were prospectively recorded.

A more recent series was also evaluated to assess potential epidemiological changes (April 2017 to February 2018).

It was extracted from a currently ongoing prospective study on the natural history of decompensated cirrhosis.

Patients who completed the 12-week follow-up were included (883 patients out of 1,295).

PARAGRAPH

The aim of the study was to assess the epidemiology of bacterial infections across Europe and potential differences in the prevalence and type of MDROs among geographical areas, countries and centers.

Three different strategies for the analysis of the data were used.

Firstly, infections developing in the whole region and in the different European regions as defined by the United Nations Geoscheme for Europe were compared.

In the Canonic series the regions and countries included were the following: Northern Europe (Denmark, Ireland, UK), Western Europe (Austria, Belgium, France, Germany, Netherlands and Switzerland) and Southern Europe (Italy and Spain).

Infections occurring in the Czech Republic were not considered in this analysis (n = 3; Eastern Europe).

The second series included infections developed in Western (Belgium, France, Germany, the Netherlands and Switzerland), Southern (Italy and Spain) and Eastern Europe (Hungary, Slovakia).

Secondly, comparisons were performed among countries (11 in the first series and 9 in the second) and centers (27 in the Canonic series and 19 in the second series).

Finally, the third objective was to perform a comprehensive assessment of the impact and risk factors of MDR bacterial infections and to evaluate the type and efficacy of empirical antibiotic strategies used in the whole region.

This last objective was only evaluated in the Canonic series.

SECTION

Definitions on bacterial infection and ACLF

PARAGRAPH

Diagnostic criteria of bacterial infections were the following: spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (SBP): polymorphonuclear (PMN) cell count in ascitic fluid ≥250/mm3; urinary tract infection (UTI): abnormal urinary sediment (>10 leukocytes/field) and positive urinary culture or uncountable leukocytes per field if negative cultures; spontaneous bacteremia: positive blood cultures and no cause of bacteremia; secondary bacteremia: a) catheter-related infection (positive blood and catheter cultures), b) bacteremia occurring within 24 h after an invasive procedure; pneumonia: clinical signs of infection and new infiltrates on chest x-ray; bronchitis: clinical features of infection, no radiographic infiltrates and positive sputum culture; skin and soft tissue infections (SSTI): clinical signs of infection associated with swelling, erythema, heat and tenderness in the skin; cholangitis: cholestasis, right upper quadrant pain and/or jaundice and radiological data of biliary obstruction; spontaneous bacterial empyema (SBE): PMN count in pleural fluid ≥500/mm3 (250/mm3 if positive culture); secondary peritonitis: PMN count in ascitic fluid ≥250/mm3 and evidence (abdominal CT/surgery) of an intraabdominal source of infection; Clostridium difficile infection (CDI): positive stool toxin in a patient with diarrhea; unproved bacterial infection: presence of fever (≥38 °C) and leukocytosis (white blood cell count ≥12,000/mm3) requiring antibiotic therapy without any identifiable source.

Infections diagnosed at admission or within 2 days after admission were classified as healthcare-associated (HCA) in patients with a prior contact with the healthcare environment (hospitalization or short-term-admission for at least 2 days in the previous 90 days, residence in a nursing home or a long-term care facility or chronic hemodialysis).

The remaining infections were considered community-acquired (CA) when they were present at admission or developed within the first 48 h after hospitalization and nosocomial when the diagnosis was made thereafter.6,10

PARAGRAPH

MDR was defined as acquired non-susceptibility to at least one agent in 3 or more antimicrobial categories.

Extensively-drug resistant (XDR) was defined as non-susceptibility to at least one agent in all but 2 or fewer antimicrobial categories and pandrug-resistant (PDR) as non-susceptibility to all currently available agents.23

The following bacteria were considered MDR in the current study: extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL, mainly Escherichia coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae) or desrepressed chromosomic Amp-C beta-lactamase-producing Enterobacteriaceae (Enterobacter or Citrobacter spp), carbapenem-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae, carbapenem-resistant Escherichia coli, carbapenem-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, carbapenem-resistant Acinetobacter baumanii, Burkholderia cepacia, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and vancomycin-susceptible and vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecium (VSE, VRE).

PARAGRAPH

ACLF at the diagnosis of infection was defined according to the EF-Clif consortium criteria.5

Patients were considered to have systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) if they fulfilled at least 2 of the following criteria: (a) core temperature >38 °C or <36 °C; (b) heart rate >90 beats/minute; (c) respiratory rate >20 breaths/minute in the absence of hepatic encephalopathy; and (d) white blood cell count >12,000 or <4,000/mm3, or differential count showing ≥10% immature PMN neutrophils.

Severe sepsis was defined by the presence of SIRS and at least 1 acute organ failure.

Septic shock was diagnosed by the presence of data compatible with SIRS and the need for vasopressor drugs in the setting of hypotension.24

Recently defined sepsis criteria were not applied in the current study as they were proposed after the end of the Canonic Study.25

PARAGRAPH

Infections were considered cured when all clinical signs of infection disappeared and on the presence of: a) urinary infections: normal urine sediment and negative urine culture; b) spontaneous or secondary bacteremia: negative control cultures after antibiotic treatment; c) pneumonia: normal chest X-ray and negative control cultures if positive at diagnosis; d) bronchitis: negative bronchial aspirate/sputum culture; e) cellulitis: normal physical exam of the skin and negative control cultures if positive at diagnosis; f) cholangitis: improvement of cholestasis, resolution of clinical symptoms and negative control cultures if positive at diagnosis; g) SBP and SBE: PMN cell count in ascitic/pleural fluid <250/mm3 and negative control cultures if positive at diagnosis.

Resolution of the rest of infections was based on conventional clinical criteria.

SECTION

Definitions on antibiotic therapy in the Canonic series

PARAGRAPH

Two types of empirical antibiotic strategies were considered: 1) “Classical” strategies: those including first to third-generation cephalosporins, amoxicillin-clavulanic-acid/cloxacillin or quinolones and 2) MDR strategies: regimens using piperacillin-tazobactam, carbapenems or ceftazidime/cefepime ± glycopeptides (or linezolid/daptomycin).

PARAGRAPH

The criteria used to consider an initial antibiotic therapy appropriate were the following: 1) Culture-positive infections: if an antibiotic with an in vitro activity appropriate for the isolated pathogen or pathogens was administered at diagnosis of infection; 2) Culture-negative infections: when the antibiotic strategies administered at the time of infection diagnosis solved the infection without need for further escalation.

Otherwise, the initial therapy was considered inappropriate.6

Fulfillment of international guidelines1 was not used as a criterion because there were no broadly accepted norms for empiric management of bacterial infections in cirrhosis at the time of performing the study.

Time to antibiotic therapy administration after diagnosis of infection was not recorded.

SECTION

Statistical analysis

PARAGRAPH

Results are presented as frequencies and percentages for categorical variables, means and SDs for normally distributed continuous variables and median and interquartile range for not normally distributed continuous variables.

In univariate analyses, Chi-square test was used for categorical variables, Student’s t test or ANOVA for normal continuous variables and Mann-Whitney or Kruskal Wallis test for not normally distributed continuous variables.

To identify predictors of infection caused by MDROs, logistic regression models were carried out.

Factors showing a clinically and statistically significant association to the outcome in univariate analyses (p < 0.1) were selected for the initial model.

The final models were fitted by using a step-wise forward method based on Likelihood Ratios with the same significance level (p < 0.05) for entering and dropping variables.

Binary logistic regression models were used to identify independent predictors of MDROs.

In all statistical analyses, significance was set at p < 0.05.

Analyses were done with SPSS (version 23.0; SPSS, Inc.

Chicago, IL) and SAS (version 9.4; SAS Institute Inc.; Cary, NC) statistical packages.

SECTION

Results

SECTION

Canonic series

SECTION

Overall bacterial infections

PARAGRAPH

The prevalence, type, clinical and epidemiological characteristics of bacterial infections diagnosed in the whole Canonic series and in patients from Northern, Southern and Western Europe are provided (Table 1).

A total of 455 patients (39.7%) developed 520 bacterial infections during the study period with no differences in the prevalence of infection between European regions.

Fifty-eight patients developed 2 or more infections.

The majority of infections were diagnosed outside the intensive care unit (ICU; 81.8%).

Regular wards were the most frequent site of hospitalization at infection diagnosis in Northern and Western Europe (49% and 42.5%, respectively) and emergency department (64%) in Southern Europe (p < 0.001).

SBP (n = 130) and UTI (n = 111) were the most frequent proven infections in the whole series and in patients from Southern and Western Europe.

Pneumonia was the most prevalent infection in Northern Europe.

Pseudomembranous colitis was mainly observed in Northern Europe (p = 0.002) while unproven infections were less prevalent in the West (p = 0.03).

No other differences in the type of infections were observed between groups.

Nosocomial infections predominated in the whole series (n = 273; 52.5%), being more frequent in Western and Northern Europe (64% and 56% vs. 38% in the South; p < 0.001).

The severity of infection at diagnosis was also significantly higher in Northern and Western Europe with a higher prevalence of severe sepsis/shock (22% and 19% vs. 9% in the South, p < 0.001) and ACLF (56% and 57% vs. 38% in the South, p < 0.001).

SECTION

Bacteria isolated in the whole series, across European regions, per country and per center

PARAGRAPH

A total of 284 bacteria were isolated in 264 culture-positive infections (50.8%).

The isolation rate was significantly higher in Northern and Western Europe (56% each vs. 43.5% in the South; p < 0.001, Table 1).

Bacterial isolation was similar in nosocomial, HCA and CA infections (53% vs. 47% vs. 49%; p = 0.519).

The rate of positive cultures was 75% in UTI, 52% in SBP, 45% in SSTI and 43% in pneumonia.

PARAGRAPH

All bacteria isolated in the whole series are shown (Table S1), in Northern, Southern and Western Europe and per country.

Escherichia coli was the most frequently isolated organism (35%), followed by Staphylococcus aureus (10.5%), Enterococcus faecalis (10%), Klebsiella pneumoniae (7%) and Streptococcus viridans and Enterococcus faecium (5% each).

PARAGRAPH

Eighty of the 284 organisms isolated in the study (28.1%) were MDROs.

They were isolated in 77 infections (14.8% of all infections, 29.2% of culture-positive infections) from 61 patients (13.4%).

As a whole, ESBL-producing Escherichia coli was the most frequent MDRO reported (n = 19), followed by VSE (n = 15), MRSA (n = 12) and ESBL-producing Klebsiella pneumoniae (n = 9) (Table 2).

The total number of isolated MDROs was significantly higher in infections occurring in Northern and Western Europe (14 [19%] and 46 [19%] vs. 20 [9.7%]; p < 0.001).

The prevalence of MDROs also differed significantly among countries ranging from 0% in Switzerland, the Czech Republic and Denmark, 7% in Spain, 19.6% in Italy, 21% in the UK, 25% in Ireland and 34% in France (p < 0.001) (Table 2).

PARAGRAPH

The type of isolated MDROs also differed between countries (Table 2) and European regions (Table 2, Fig. S1).

ESBL and Amp-C producing Enterobacteriaceae were more frequent in France (18%), followed by Italy (13%), the UK and the Netherlands (12% each), Austria (3.8%), Belgium (3.4%) and Spain (3%).

VSE predominated in France and Austria (8% each) and MRSA in infections occurring in the Netherlands (6%), the UK and Ireland (5% each).

Infections by XDR bacteria were infrequent and heterogeneously distributed.

Carbapenem-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae was reported in 2 patients (<1%), 1 from the UK and 1 from Germany while carbapenem-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa was reported in 4 cases, 2 in Southern Europe (0.8%; 1 in Italy, 1 in Spain) and 2 in Western Europe (0.8%; France).

VRE was also infrequent (n = 3) and diagnosed in Northern (2.8%; 1 in UK and 1 in Ireland) and Western Europe (0.4%; 1 in Germany).

No statistically significant differences were observed when comparing the type of MDROs isolated in the different European regions.

No PDR bacteria were reported.

PARAGRAPH

The MDR bacteria isolated in the different centers in the Canonic series are shown (Table S2 and Fig. 1).

Nineteen centers (70%) reported infections caused by MDROs.

Remarkable differences were observed in the prevalence and type of MDR strains among hospitals.

Frankfurt (41%), Clichy (39%), Villejuif (30%) and London (King’s College, 27%) showed the highest prevalence of MDROs while no resistant strains were reported in Aarhus, Hvidovre, Bern, Graz, Ghent, Madrid (Ramon y Cajal) and Prague.

No culture-positive infections were reported in Vienna.

ESBL-Escherichia coli predominated in Clichy, Frankfurt, Barcelona (St. Pau), Padua, London (King’s College) and Leuven and ESBL-Klebsiella pneumoniae in London (UC) and Hamburg.

The prevalence of ESBL/Amp-C beta-lactamase-producing Enterobacteriaceae (Fig. 2A) and of MRSA (Fig. 2B) observed in the different centers participating in the Canonic Study is shown.

A heterogeneous distribution of MDROs was observed among different centers, even in those located in the same geographical region and city.

SECTION

Infections caused by MDROs

PARAGRAPH

The prevalence, type, clinical and epidemiological characteristics of bacterial infections caused by MDROs in the whole series and in the different European regions is shown (Table 3).

The prevalence of MDR bacterial infections was 14.8% if considering all infections (13.4% if restricting the analysis to only one infection per patient) and 29.2% in culture-positive episodes.

The prevalence of MDROs was significantly higher in Northern and Western Europe (all infections: 18.1% and 19.3%; culture-positive infections: 32.5% and 34.6%) than in Southern Europe (8.7% and 20%, respectively).

MDROs were more frequently isolated in bacteremia (28.6%), pneumonia (23.5%), and UTI (20.7%) in the whole series, although differences were not statistically significant.

The rate of isolation of MDROs was not significantly different between specific infections in the different European regions.

MDR bacteria were also more frequently isolated in the ICU (23.8% vs. 12.2%; p = 0.005) and in nosocomial infections (21.3% vs. 8.3% and 6.6% in CA and HCA infections, respectively; p < 0.001).

Finally, MDROs were more prevalent in infections causing severe sepsis/shock (30.3% vs. 12.2%, p < 0.001) or ACLF (20.5% vs. 9.4%, p < 0.001).

SECTION

Type and efficacy of first line antibiotic strategies

PARAGRAPH

Two main factors influenced first line antibiotic schemes: the site of acquisition of infection and severity (Table S3).

Classical antibiotic strategies were used frequently in CA infections as first line therapy in Western (80.5%) and Southern Europe (74.6%) but not in Northern Europe (33.3).

In contrast, nosocomial episodes were mainly treated with strategies covering MDROs in the 3 European regions analyzed (71.1%, 63.6% and 60%, in Northern, Southern and Western Europe, respectively).

Both strategies were similarly used for the empirical treatment of HCA infections, except for Northern Europe, where MDR covering strategies were again predominantly used.

Remarkably, patients with severe sepsis/shock more frequently received broad-spectrum antibiotics covering MDROs in the whole series and in Northern, Southern and Western Europe (73.3%, 62.5%, and 67.5%, respectively).

However, antibiotic prescription differed among European regions in patients with sepsis.

MDR covering strategies were used more frequently in septic patients in Northern Europe (93.3%) and classical strategies in Southern Europe (72%).

PARAGRAPH

The efficacy of classical and MDR empirical antibiotic strategies is shown (Table 4).

In the whole series, empirical MDR covering strategies were more effective (higher infection resolution rate or higher adequacy to the microbiological susceptibility) than empiric classical schemes in nosocomial infections (81.7% vs. 68%, respectively, p = 0.01).

A trend towards statistical significance was also observed in severe sepsis/shock (81.3% vs. 60.9%, p = 0.06) and in infectious episodes with or without sepsis (84.7% vs. 76.7%, p = 0.06).

This higher efficacy of MDR covering strategies was observed in nosocomial episodes reported in the 3 European regions, although differences were only statistically significant in Western Europe.

Inadequacy of first line antibiotic strategies increased 28-day mortality in both AD (33.3% vs. 7.7%; p < 0.001) and ACLF patients (50% vs. 25.8%, p = 0.002) (Table S4, Fig. 3).

PARAGRAPH

Table S5 shows the type of empirical antibiotic strategies prescribed in the centers, showing a high prevalence of MDR bacterial infections (>15%).

Initial schemes and resolution rates differed markedly between centers.

SECTION

Impact of antibiotic resistance on clinical outcome

PARAGRAPH

The clinical outcomes of patients infected with MDROs were compared to the outcomes in patients with infections caused by susceptible bacteria or with no microbiological isolation, in the whole series and across European regions (Table 5).

The resolution rate of infections was significantly lower in episodes caused by MDROs (71.4% vs. 87.6%, p < 0.001).

Infections caused by MDR strains led to a higher prevalence of severe sepsis/shock (31.9% vs. 12.2%, p < 0.001), ACLF (67.5% vs. 45.6%, p < 0.001) and 28-day mortality (35.1% vs. 18.1%, p < 0.001).

The negative impact of antibiotic resistance on clinical outcomes was confirmed across the different European regions, although we only observed significant differences in short-term mortality in Northern and Western Europe, probably as a result of the higher baseline severity of infections in these regions.

PARAGRAPH

The clinical impact of antibiotic resistance was also evaluated based on the adequacy of initial antibiotic strategies (Table 5).

The resolution rate of infections with no isolation or caused by susceptible bacteria was significantly higher (90.8% vs. 71.4%; p < 0.001) and 28-day mortality significantly lower (14.9% vs. 41.1%; p < 0.001) if initial antibiotic strategies were adequate.

Adequacy of empirical antibiotic strategies was also associated with higher resolution rates (82.2% vs. 58.1%; p = 0.02) and a trend towards lower 28-day mortality (26.7% vs. 45.2%, p = 0.09) in infections caused by MDROs.

SECTION

Risk factors for MDR bacterial infection

PARAGRAPH

The risk factors associated with the development of infections caused by MDROs in the univariate and multivariate analysis in the whole series and in culture-positive infections are shown (Table 6 and Table S6).

Nosocomial infection (odds ratio [OR] 2.74; 95% CI 1.45–5.19; p = 0.002), ICU admission (OR 2.09; 95% CI 1.11–3.96; p = 0.02) and recent hospitalization (OR 1.93; 95% CI 1.04–3.58; p = 0.038) were identified as independent predictors of MDR infection in the whole series.

Mechanical ventilation (OR 2.90; 95% CI 1.35–6.23; p = 0.006) was the only factor independently associated with MDR infection in nosocomial episodes.

No independent predictors of MDR infection were identified for CA and HCA infections.

Similar results were obtained when the analysis was restricted to culture-positive infections.

SECTION

Second series

SECTION

Clinical characteristics and epidemiology of bacterial infections

PARAGRAPH

A total of 284 patients (32.2%) developed 392 bacterial infections.

The prevalence of infection was significantly higher in Eastern (45.4%) and Southern Europe (39.4%) than in Western Europe (18.5%; p < 0.0001; Table S7).

UTI (n = 104), SBP (n = 50), pneumonia (n = 43), bacteremia (n = 38) and SSTI (n = 24) were the most frequent proven infections in this series.

CA infections predominated in the whole population (n = 189; 53%) and in the different European regions.

The severity of infection at diagnosis was similar among the different European regions.

The prevalence of MDR bacterial infections was 23.3% if all infections are considered and 37.9% in culture-positive episodes.

No significant differences in the prevalence of MDR bacterial infections were observed among European regions when all infections were considered.

In contrast, MDR strains were more frequently isolated in culture-positive infections developed in Eastern and Southern Europe (Table S7).

PARAGRAPH

The types of MDROs isolated in the second series are shown (Table S8).

Ninety-six MDR strains were isolated in 83 MDR bacterial infections.

As a whole, ESBL-producing Escherichia coli continued to be the most frequent MDRO reported (n = 25), followed by VSE (n = 15), ESBL-producing Klebsiella pneumoniae (n = 14), carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae (n = 8), and MRSA and VRE (n = 5 each).

When comparing the type of MDROs isolated in the different European regions, only ESBL-producing Klebsiella pneumoniae was significantly more frequent in Eastern Europe (11.8% vs. 2.3% and 1.2% in Southern and Western Europe; p = 0.002).

No PDR bacteria were reported.

The prevalence and type of MDR bacteria isolated in the different centers are shown (Fig. 4).

Fifteen centers (79%) from 8 countries (89%) reported infections caused by MDROs.

Remarkable differences were observed in the prevalence and type of MDR strains between hospitals.

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

The current investigation reports for the first time the epidemiology of MDR bacterial infections in decompensated cirrhosis and ACLF across Europe.

The study analyzes information prospectively recorded in 2 series and includes 739 patients with bacterial infection enrolled in 32 centers from 16 countries.

From a geographical point of view, the study constitutes the broadest epidemiological assessment of bacterial infections ever performed in cirrhosis.

Our investigation confirms that MDR bacterial infections constitute a global and growing healthcare problem in hepatology.

MDR were reported in 70% of the liver units and in 9 of the 12 countries participating in the Canonic study, figures that increased to almost 80% of hospitals and 8 out of 9 countries in the more recent series.

Prevalence of MDR bacterial infections varied markedly among European regions, being higher in Northern and Western Europe in the Canonic series and in Eastern and Southern Europe in the second series.

This discrepancy is probably related to differences in the epidemiological characteristics of infections between series.

The pattern of antibiotic resistance was highly heterogeneous, with marked differences in the type of MDROs among countries and centers in the 2 series analyzed.

PARAGRAPH

The overall prevalence of MDR bacterial infections in the whole Canonic cohort of culture-positive infections was 29.2% (14.8% if all infections are considered).

This figure is similar to that reported in some single-center investigations performed in European countries.

Studies published to date report a prevalence of MDROs in culture-positive infections ranging from 8% in Turkey, 19–21% in Greece, 14–24% in Sweden-Germany and 21–31% in Spain to 31% in France and 27–46% in Italy.6,12,13,15,20,26–31

It is important to remark that there were marked differences in the prevalence of MDROs among countries in the first series.

The isolation rate of MDROs varied from 0% in Switzerland, the Czech Republic and Denmark and 7% in Spain to 20% in Italy, 21% in the UK, 25% in Ireland and 34% in France.

Belgium, Germany, the Netherlands and Austria showed intermediate rates of MDROs.

The prevalence of MDR bacterial infections increased to 38% in culture-positive episodes in the second series, with important differences among regions.

This increase in the rate of MDR bacterial infections, almost 10% in less than 8 years, underlines the growing clinical relevance of antibiotic resistance in decompensated cirrhosis and ACLF.

PARAGRAPH

Differences in the prevalence of MDROs were also observed among the participant centers in the 2 series, even among those located in the same geographical region or city.

Frankfurt, Clichy, Villejuif and King’s College of London in the Canonic series and Roma, Bologna, Bern and Turin in the second series showed the highest prevalence of MDROs, while other centers reported no resistant strains or intermediate MDR rates.

The low number of infections recorded in centers reporting no MDROs in the first and second series (44 and 37 infections in total, respectively) probably explain the absence of MDROs isolation.

Meanwhile, both series were analysed over a short time period (7 and 11 months), which could have limited our capacity to precisely evaluate the real prevalence of MDROs in the different countries and centers.

Both factors could also explain the discrepancies observed in the prevalence of MDROs in the same center between the 2 series (Bern, Leiden, Munich) and between our study and other investigations (i.e. Spain and Italy).6,12,21

PARAGRAPH

In the Canonic series, ESBL-producing Enterobacteriaceae was the MDRO most frequently isolated in the study, followed by VSE and MRSA.

However, the type of resistant strain significantly differed across countries and centers.

ESBL and Amp-C producing Enterobacteriaceae were more frequently isolated in France, Italy, the UK and the Netherlands; VSE predominated in France and Austria and MRSA in infections occurring in the Netherlands, the UK and Ireland.

ESBL-producing Enterobacteriaceae continued to be the most frequent MDRO reported in the 2017–2018 series, but marked differences were observed in the type of resistant bacteria among regions and centers.

This finding underlines the importance of having surveillance programs aimed at investigating the prevalence and epidemiological pattern of MDROs at each hospital.

Global epidemiological data are informative but are not applicable to specific centers.32

PARAGRAPH

Infections by XDR bacteria were infrequent and heterogeneously distributed in the Canonic series.

Carbapenem-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae, carbapenem-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa and VRE were reported sporadically in different European regions in this first series.

Infections by these difficult to treat bacteria continued to be infrequent in the more recent series but we observed the emergence of carbapenem-resistant Eschericha coli as XDR bacteria and a small increase in the rate of infections caused by VRE.

No PDR bacteria were reported in either series.

Therefore, our results suggest that although XDR bacteria constitute a growing and extremely dangerous problem in cirrhosis, global infection rates are far from those reported in single-center studies (from 3% to 14%).12,32

PARAGRAPH

MDR bacteria were more frequently isolated in the ICU and in nosocomial episodes.

MDR bacterial infections were more severe (higher rate of severe sepsis/shock and/or ACLF at diagnosis) and associated to lower resolution rate and higher mortality at 28 days, especially if treated with inadequate empirical antibiotic strategies.

Our results, therefore, confirm previous studies in decompensated cirrhosis showing that antibiotic resistance is associated with poor prognosis and high short-term mortality.10,13,17,20–22

This poor prognosis of infections caused by MDROs has also been reported in patients with solid or hematological malignancies and in critical care in the general population.33–35

PARAGRAPH

A nosocomial origin of infection, ICU admission and recent hospitalization within the previous 3 months were the only independent risk factors for MDR bacterial infections identified in the whole Canonic cohort, a finding that underlines the key relevance of hospitalization in determining the epidemiological risk of antibiotic resistance in the cirrhotic population.

Instrumentation, exposure to broad-spectrum antibiotics and possibly in-hospital colonization by MDR bacteria could account for this finding.

In contrast to previous studies, long-term norfloxacin prophylaxis10 was not identified as a risk factor of MDR in the current series.

The low number of patients on long-term quinolone prophylaxis in our study (n = 7) prevented us from adequately evaluating this potential risk factor.

The rate of antibiotic resistance was low in HCA infections in the Canonic series but similar to that observed in nosocomial episodes in the more recent series, a feature probably related to differences in the epidemiological characteristics between countries and centers.

Mechanical ventilation, a parameter reflecting both organ support and a high degree of instrumentation, was the only factor independently associated with MDR infection in nosocomial episodes.

Regretfully, we were unable to identify risk factors for MDR infections developing within the first 48 h of hospitalization.

PARAGRAPH

The current study also describes for the first time the type and efficacy of empirical antibiotic strategies used across Europe.

Classical antibiotics, those based on third-generation cephalosporins and quinolones, were mainly used in CA infections while schemes covering MDROs were prescribed more frequently in nosocomial episodes and in severe sepsis/shock.

As a whole, MDR covering strategies were more effective than classical schemes, especially in nosocomial infections.

Importantly, inadequacy of first-line antibiotic strategies had a negative impact on short-term survival, both in patients with AD and ACLF, a feature also observed when the analysis was restricted to MDR bacterial infections.

Therefore, our findings support the current recommendations on empirical antibiotic strategies in decompensated cirrhosis.

Broad schemes covering all potential pathogens should be empirically used in the nosocomial setting and in severe sepsis/shock and should be followed by rapid de-escalation strategies to avoid a further spread of antibiotic resistance.1,9,36,37

First-line antibiotic strategies should be decided locally together with the infectious disease specialists and should consider the specific epidemiological pattern of antibiotic resistance, which is highly heterogeneous according to the results of the current investigation.

Two recent studies demonstrate the efficacy of adapting the empirical antibiotic strategies to the local pattern of resistance.38,39

PARAGRAPH

Our investigation confirms the increasing prevalence and negative impact of MDR bacterial infections in cirrhosis in the majority of the European centers participating in the study.

Based on this observation, the urgent evaluation of new strategies aimed at preventing the spread of antibiotic resistance in the cirrhotic population is warranted.

Clinical impact and cost/effectiveness of measures such as epidemiological surveillance (regular assessment of potential carriers of MDROs through rectal and nasal swabs during hospitalization),40,41 rapid microbiological tests (micro-arrays or multiplex PCR techniques capable of detecting gene targets specific to MDROs and MALDI-TOF MS),42,43 and antibiotic stewardship programs deserve further evaluation.9,44,45

PARAGRAPH

In conclusion, our study demonstrates that MDR bacterial infections constitute a global and growing healthcare problem in decompensated cirrhosis and ACLF across Europe.

The pattern of antibiotic resistance was highly heterogeneous, with marked differences in the type of MDROs among countries and centers.

Antibiotic resistance was associated with poor prognosis and failure of first-line antibiotic strategies based on third-generation cephalosporins or quinolones.

SECTION

Financial support

PARAGRAPH

The study was supported by the European Foundation for the Study of Chronic Liver Failure (EF-Clif).

EF-Clif received unrestricted donations from Grifols and Cellex Foundations and is partner or contributor in several projects of the EU Horizon 2020 research program.

Maria Papp was supported by the Janos Bolyai Research Scholarship of the Hungarian Academy of Science (BO/00232/17/5) and the New National Excellence Program of the Ministry of Human Capacities (ÚNKP-18-4 Bolyai Plus).

Pere Ginès is a recipient of the ICREA ACADEMIA AWARD (2015–2020).

SECTION

Conflicts of interest

PARAGRAPH

Javier Fernández has received grant and research support from Grifols, speaker honorarium from MSD and educational grant from Pfizer.

François Durand has received research funding and grant from Astellas and Gilead and served scientific advisory board for Novartis and Gilead.

Agustin Albillos has served as advisor/lecturer for Abbvie, Gilead, Gore, Grifols, Intercept Pharmaceuticals, Pfizer and Merck & Co and received research/educational grants from Gilead.

Tania M. Welzel received consultant honorariums from Abbvie, Gilead and BMS.

Manuela Merli has received speaker honorarium from Kedrion.

Pere Ginès has received speaker honorarium and research funding from Grifols, served on the scientific advisory board for Ferring and Sequena and received research funding from Sequena.

Vicente Arroyo has received grant and research support from Grifols.

All other authors declare that they have no conflict of interest

SECTION

Authors’ contributions

PARAGRAPH

JF, VP, JA, AA, CD, EG, CS, MP and VA participated in data analysis and interpretation.

JF, TG, RW, VF, JT, FD, RJ, MP, PC, VV, RB, SP, MJ, AA, CA, GS, TN, WL, AG, AdG, MM, MC, PG, PA and VA participated in the writing group.

VA was responsible for obtaining funding and overall project collaboration.

SECTION

Disclosures

PARAGRAPH

The EASL-CLIF Consortium is a network of 101 European University hospitals supported by the EF-Clif.

EF-Clif is a private non-profit organization aimed at improving clinical and translational research in cirrhosis.

The scientific agenda of the EASL-CLIF Consortium and the specific research protocols are made exclusively by the Steering Committee members without any participation of pharmaceutical companies.