10.1016/j.jasrep.2018.11.031

FULLTEXT

TITLE

A non-metric traits study of skulls from Epiclassic Xaltocan in relation to other Mesoamerican cultures

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

In the Basin of Mexico, the Epiclassic period (ca. 600–900 CE) was marked by social, political, economic, and cultural change.

Archaeological data suggest that most of the regional population during this time was organized around small political centers, which were separated by areas of low population and small hamlets (e.g. Parsons, 1989, 2008).

Key population concentrations may have been tied to particular political and economic spheres around (1) Teotihuacan, (2) Cuauhtitlan-Atzcapotzalco, (3) Portezuelo–Cerro de la Estrella–Xico, (4) Cerro de la Mesa Ahumada, and (5) Tula, to the north (Parsons, 1989; García-Chávez, 2004; García-Chávez and Martínez-Yrízar, 2006; Crider et al., 2007).

Several scholars have speculated that the political fragmentation in the region led to competition and, perhaps, to conflict (e.g. Kelly, 1978; Diehl and Berlo, 1989).

It is likely that these conditions shaped the regional population dynamics (Cowgill, 2013; Beekman, 2015; Beekman and Christensen, 2003, 2011).

PARAGRAPH

This study focuses on a ritual site from the Epiclassic period in former Lake Xaltocan (designated Non-Grid 4 by surveyors), just south of the community that bears the same name today.

The remains, represented by crania, of over 180 individuals, in various states of preservation, were recovered through excavations.

Prior to work at Non-Grid 4, most of our knowledge of Xaltocan was associated to occupations dating to the later Postclassic period (900–1519 CE) (Brumfiel, 2003, 2005; Morehart and Crider, 2016).

Several historic sources suggest that Xaltocan was an Otomi community, at least during the Early to Middle Postclassic period (ca. 900 CE/1000–1350) (Brumfiel, 2003, 2005).

According to Alva Ixtlilxóchitl and Vázquez (1985), Xaltocan was the capital of an Otomi nation, and it was one of the major political centers prior to the formation of the Aztec Empire in the early 15th century, during the Late Postclassic period (ca. 1350–1519 CE) (Carrasco, 1950; Lorenzo-Monterrubio, 2001).

When the town was incorporated into the Aztec Empire, a community-wide demographic shift occurred (Mata-Miguez et al., 2012).

PARAGRAPH

Biologically, we do not have much information about the population who resided in the area during earlier times, such as the Epiclassic period.

This lacuna is widened by the scarce archaeological data on the town itself from previous periods (Morehart and Crider, 2016).

Consequently, the origin of the sacrificed individuals found at Lake Xaltocan is unknown, but the osteological sample offers an excellent opportunity to understand past biological dynamics in the context of political transformation.

This article has two basic goals: First, we provide baseline bioarchaeological information about the crania from Xaltocan.

Second, we attempt to determine the existence of any biological affinities between the sacrifices in Xaltocan and other representative samples from archaeological sites throughout central Mexico across time, including the Preclassic (Tlatilco), the Classic (Teotihuacan) and the Epiclassic (Valle de Toluca) periods (see Fig. 1).

SECTION

Decapitation and human sacrifice in ancient México

PARAGRAPH

Decapitation was an integral ritual act in the ceremonial life of Pre-Columbian Mesoamerica (López-Luján and Olivier, 2010).

Ritual sacrifice was commonly related to warfare and to public acts of domination and power.

In some Mesoamerican groups, such as the Nahua (Aztecs), the head was considered to be the source of considerable power, and it was referred to as tonali (López-Austin, 1980).

Isolated human heads have been recovered from different pre-Hispanic sites in Mexico, affiliated with diverse cultural groups such as the Teotihuacans, the Aztecs, and the Mayas, among others.

The importance of decapitation in Mesoamerica is evident in its plastic representations in different forms, such as mural paintings, monuments, sculptures, vessels, and codices, as well as in the discovery of hundreds of severed human crania.

Exhibitions of human trophy taking and decapitation rituals were an ancient and common practice in Mesoamerica.

The tzompantli, or skull rack, was a widespread way in which the skulls of war captives or other sacrificial victims were publicly displayed from the Epiclassic (600–900 CE) through the Postclassic (900–1250 CE) periods (Mendoza, 2007).

According to Moser (1973) and Ringle et al. (1998), a strong link between politics, ritual, and the act of decapitation, particularly evident in the iconography of the era, developed throughout Mesoamerica during the Epiclassic period.

This iconography is often associated to ballcourts, suggesting that ballgames had symbolic ties to war and conquest.

Iconography from El Tajín, Chichén Itzá, and Santa Lucía Cotzumalhuapa (Guatemala), for example, show apparent relations between head trophies, conquests, and ballgames.

By the Postclassic period, the relationship between war-related raiding and the capture of enemies, who would become victims of sacrifice, was clear (Graulich, 2010; Olivier, 2010).

PARAGRAPH

Ritual practices, spiritual beliefs, sacred landscapes, ecological processes, and politics were closely associated in ancient Mesoamerica.

In most cases, the archaeological discovery of actual skull offerings is related to the excavations of larger monumental constructions, such as the Pyramid of the Moon at Teotihuacan (see Sugiyama and López-Luján, 2007).

Thus, the physical nature of the Xaltocan site, described below, is unique because it is in a lacustrine environment, and it lacks associations with monumental architecture in a public space.

Nevertheless, ritual practices, including sacrifice, were commonly undertaken at natural features in Mesoamerica, including water shrines.

The Pantitlán shrine, located in former Lake Texcoco, outside of present-day Mexico City, is a well-known example of a place where the Aztecs practiced human sacrifice for the sake of water and rain deities (see Bernadino de Sahagun, 1951).

Such offerings were an important means by which Mesoamericans interacted with a living, animated landscape upon which their livelihood depended (Arnold, 1999).

SECTION

Sacrificial context

PARAGRAPH

In 2007, archaeologists discovered the ritual site during a survey of Lake Xaltocan.

The site was labeled Non-Grid 4, using the project's designation system for sites located outside the formal survey grid established for systematic surface collections (see Fig. 2).

Non-Grid 4 was almost entirely buried by both lacustrine and windblown sediment, which left very little topographic relief visible.

Surveyors discovered it largely due to the presence of rodents' burrows and looters' pits, which led to the accumulation of artifacts and human remains on the surface.

In fact, other post-depositional formation processes that have affected the site's preservation include past flooding and periodic farming, both with mechanized plows and tractors (Morehart, 2010).

PARAGRAPH

Non-Grid 4 was excavated during two seasons: First, in 2007 with a small number of 2 × 2 m test units, and again in 2012 using a broad, horizontal exposure.

Excavations revealed that the shrine was an amorphous platform built by layering clay and limestone.

We refer to the site as a shrine for heuristic purposes, to indicate a physical locus where repeated ritual activities were concentrated (see discussion in Morehart et al., 2012:430, Morehart, 2017).

On this platform, ritual practitioners interred the crania of many individuals.

We recovered 110 complete or nearly complete crania, as well as additional cranial fragments that allowed us to estimate a minimum of 180 individuals in the sample (though our analyses centered exclusively on the complete crania).

The ritual context was described by Morehart (2009, 2015) and Morehart et al. (2012).

The ritual function was identified based on the burials, as well as according to the artifact assemblage, which contained high frequencies of incense burners and deity figurines (e.g., Tlaloc, a rain deity).

Archaeologists interpret the crania themselves as ritual offerings, likely for the sake of water, rain, and fertility deities.

Nevertheless, as sacrifices, they are also powerful symbolic statements of ritual violence.

PARAGRAPH

Although many of the crania were deposited together, it is noteworthy that the full assemblage of offerings at Non-Grid 4 does not represent a single ritual event, even though many of the complete skulls were found in concentrations or sets of alignment.

Some skulls were broken, due to damage that occurred well after deposition (i.e., from looting or rodent activity).

Other skulls exhibit perimortem and postmortem fractures, and they show different degrees of destruction of bones, in the facial region or in the vault, which are not recent.

These broken skulls were placed in different sets accompanied by jaws, cervical vertebrae, and phalanges of hands and feet.

The concentrations of bones and their conditions indicate that ritual offerings occurred over time during the Epiclassic period.

In fact, radiocarbon dates from pine charcoal and maize cobs recovered from the site correspond to the entire Epiclassic period, from the late 6th century to the 9th century AD (Morehart et al., 2012).

Ceramics include types that were common during both the earlier and later stages of the Epiclassic period (i.e., Garita Black-Brown Incised and Coyotlatelco Red on Natural, respectively), as well as other types that are transitional between the Epiclassic and the Early Postclassic (e.g., Mazapan Red on Natural) periods (Morehart, 2015; Morehart et al., 2012).

PARAGRAPH

The jaw was articulated in 39.2% of the 110 almost complete skulls discovered.

Additionally, 16.8% of the specimens had the atlas vertebra in anatomical connection with the cranium; the axis vertebrae were also recovered in almost half of these individuals.

The osteological analysis shed light on the manner in which the decapitations were carried out.

The anatomical articulation of the cervical vertebrae in most skulls, as well as the presence of the hyoid bone, which is supported by soft tissues and loses its anatomical position rapidly during decomposition, strongly suggest that the crania still retained soft tissue at time of burial.

We also documented cut marks on the backs of the mandibular branches on the vertebral bodies, as well as at the base of the skull at the foramen magnum (see Fig. 3).

These patterns indicate that the individuals were placed facing the floor at the time of decapitation.

This finding contrasts with most available data on pre-Hispanic decapitations, which tend to reveal markings between the third, fourth, and fifth vertebrae, consistent with individuals being face up during the disarticulation (Chávez-Balderas, 2017).

Moreover, the remains do not show considerable evidence of weathering, which indicates that they were interred soon after deposition, if not after decapitation.

Furthermore, they do not show evidence of defleshing or exposure to heat, which indicates that no additional manipulations were carried out after decapitation and burial.

PARAGRAPH

Documenting the geographic and ethnic biographies of the individuals sacrificed may help to understand the role that this site played in the broader political, social, and sacred landscape.

It may be a pan-regional shrine, where different groups came together for ceremonial events, to forge alliances, and to engage in ritual practices.

In fact, the pottery remains at the site exhibit similarities to wares common to the Basin of Mexico, the El Bajío region to the north, and Oaxaca (Morehart, 2009).

The biodistance analysis presented below attempts to shed light on the biological identities of these individuals in order to better clarify how sacred sites and ritual violence were interrelated during a time of major cultural change, migration, and political instability.

SECTION

Material and methods

PARAGRAPH

Our analysis compares data from Non-Grid 4 at Xaltocan with data from other archaeological sites.

The sample consists of 276 adult skulls extracted from Tlatilco (N1 = 78), Teotihuacan (N2 = 66), Valle de Toluca (N3 = 23) and Xaltocan (N4 = 118).

This approach was followed in order to compare the Xaltocan remains to populations from various parts of the central Mexican highlands dating to different periods.

Tlatilco was one of the most important villages of the Early Formative (ca. 1500–1000 BCE) period in central Mexico.

It is located in the lower eastern foothills of the Sierra de las Cruces, between Valle de Toluca and the southern Basin of Mexico, approximately 30 km of Non-Grid 4 at Lake Xaltocan.

During the second half of the 20th century, hundreds of skeletons, dated between 1200 and 950 BCE, were uncovered (Piña Chan, 1958; Lorenzo, 1965; García Moll et al., 1991).

Teotihuacan, located 20 km east of Non-Grid 4 at Lake Xaltocan, has been recognized as the most important city in the Basin of Mexico and throughout Mesoamerica during the Classic period (ca. 0–650 CE) (Cowgill, 2015).

The sites from Valle de Toluca are the farthest from Non-Grid 4 at Lake Xaltocan, approximately 70 km as the crow flies, in the Upper Basin of the Lerma River, west of the Basin of Mexico.

Osteological remains from two neighboring Epiclassic period communities were selected: Santa Cruz Atizapan and San Mateo Atenco (Sugiura, 1998, 2009; Sugiura et al., 2017).

PARAGRAPH

We studied the biological variation within our sample by examining non-metric traits (NMT) specifically related to the genotype (Cheverud and Buikstra, 1981; Hauser and De Stefano, 1989; Pink et al., 2016).

NMT offer several advantages over traditional metric and geometric morphometric analysis (GMA) for the phenotypic study of skulls.

GMA allows the analysis of the shape of the skulls using well specified landmarks (Bookstein, 1997, Zelditch et al., 2012); but to be useful, it requires a sample of intact skulls.

NMT, in contrast, may be undertaken with complete and incomplete skulls.

For example, when bilateral nonmetric traits are not available to be scored on one side, they can be scored on the other one (i.e., as present or absent).

This method offers an effective way to score the traits, and it is supported by several studies that show the existence of a strong correlation between bilateral traits (Cheverud and Buikstra, 1981; McGrath et al., 1984).

Furthermore, NMT does not require that all the metric traits under study be present in each skull.

PARAGRAPH

All the skulls were analyzed following standard protocols for age and sex estimation (Buikstra and Ubelaker, 1994).

For all four groups, we studied crania with and without artificial modification.

Since artificial modification may change the non-metric traits of the vault, we restricted our study to thirteen non-metric traits of the facial and basal region of the skull (Ossenberg, 1970; Del Papa and Perez, 2007).

We collected data from the samples taken at Non-Grid 4 Xaltocan, Teotihuacan, and Valle de Toluca.

The data from Tlatilco were compiled by us but originally collected by Vargas (1973).

These tabulated 13 non-metric trait scores are reported in Table 1.

SECTION

Statistical methods

PARAGRAPH

We undertook the study using the mean measure of divergence (MMD) biodistance, first used by Grewal (1962), and then introduced in the anthropological community by Berry and Berry (1967) as a measure of dissimilarities of non-metric traits with great success.

Over the years the original Grewal's transformation sin−1 (1–2 K/N) has been improved using Freeman and Tukey (1950) or Anscombe (1948) transformations.

Both giving almost the same results (Harris and Sjøvold, 2004).

Moreover, MMD has the advantage that it can be easily tested for statistical significance and is an unbiased estimator (de Souza and Houghton, 1977).

The data analysis was carried out using a non-metric multidimensional scaling analysis (nMDS), which is a very flexible ordination method (Taguchi and Oono, 2004), whose operation we explain in the next section.

The UPGMA clustering was also used to contrast with the nMDS results.

(Sokal and Michener, 1958).

Numerical calculations were done using PAST 3.21, GNUPLOT 5.0 and self-made programs with the aid of subroutines in C (Press et al., 1996).

PARAGRAPH

When necessary, we labeled the groups with the subscripts μ and ν, in the following order:

Tlatilco N1 = 78

Teotihuacan N2 = 66

Valle de Toluca N3 = 23

Xaltocan N4 = 188

PARAGRAPH

Let M = 13 denote the number of non-metrics traits shown on Table 1, by nμi the number of cases measured in the μ-group, so that nμi ≤ Nμ, and by Kμi the number of times that the i-trait is present.

PARAGRAPH

We calculated the MMD biodistance in groups μ and ν, given by:MMDμν=1M∑i=1Mθμi−θνi2−1nμi+0.5−1nνi+0.5where θμi is measured in radians, and it is given by the Anscombe's transformation (Anscombe, 1948; Harris and Sjøvold, 2004):θμi=sin-11-2Kμi+38nμi+34

PARAGRAPH

When MMD < 0 between two groups, its value is converted to 0, which means that neither group may be differentiated by the MMD.

To get a biodistance that can be measured by its level of significance, it is better to normalize it by its standard deviation σ.

The variance σ2 of MMD(μ, ν) is given by (de Souza and Houghton, 1977):σ2=2M2∑i=1M1nμi+0.5+1nνi+0.52

PARAGRAPH

And the standardized MMD(μ, ν) biodistance is as follows:stMMDμν=MMDμν/σ.

PARAGRAPH

For M ≫ 1 Eq. (2), almost follows a N(0, 1) Gaussian distribution under the null hypothesis that there is no difference between the groups (de Souza and Houghton, 1977).

In general, for stMMD(μ, ν) ≥ 2, biodistances have been considered significant at the α = 0.05 level.

Nevertheless, the Gaussian assumption is derived using the Central Limit Theorem, which holds very well for M~100.

At the order of M~10 (within which we are working), the level of confidence using the N(0, 1) distribution may be overestimated.

To avoid these problems, we prefer to work with the quantity:X≡∑i=1Mθμi-θνi2/1nμi+0.5+1nνi+0.5

PARAGRAPH

Which follows a χ2M distribution under the null hypothesis that there is no difference between the groups (de Souza and Houghton, 1977).

PARAGRAPH

The biodistance matrix obtained from Eq. (2) is shown in Table 2.

For the smallest biodistance (Xaltocan vs. Valle de Toluca), Eq. (3) gives X = 47.9939.

So, for M = 13, χ2M gives a confidence level of α = 6.6 × 10−6, making it clear that those groups are different (Eq. (3) gives smaller α's for the other biodistances).

SECTION

Results and discussion

PARAGRAPH

A better understanding of the groups' separation may be obtained by an nMDS analysis.

This algorithm attempts to place the data points in a two- or three-dimensional coordinate system so that the ranking order of Table 2 is preserved as best as possible.

This is done by minimizing a cost function called stress.

The more stress approaches zero, the best the data points may be placed in a two- or three-dimensional coordinate system with little distortion.

An alternative way is to follow a cluster analysis using the UPGMA method (Sokal and Michener, 1958).

PARAGRAPH

The results of the nMDS analysis are shown in Fig. 4, with a stress value = 0.

They are in good coincidence with the biodistances in Table 2.

Furthermore, a cluster analysis performed with the UPGMA method shows analogous results (Fig. 5).

PARAGRAPH

The analysis suggests that the individuals sacrificed and buried at Lake Xaltocan were members of different populations who found themselves immersed in the political dynamics of the Epiclassic period.

If the Xaltocan's crania represent trophy heads, they may indicate that feuding was taking place after the decline of Teotihuacan.

The disappearance of Teotihuacan as a political, economic, demographic, social, and cultural center led to a series of population movements in the Basin of Mexico (Carrasco, 1950; Beekman and Christensen, 2003; Lastra, 2006).

The evidence of sacrifice at Lake Xaltocan suggests that these transformations also involved conflict (Morehart et al., 2012).

PARAGRAPH

The results of our study do not allow us to identify nor suggest the specific historically-named ethnic groups to which the sacrificed subjects belonged (e.g., Otopame, Chichimeca, or Nahua affiliation groups).

Notwithstanding, the results show a deeper affiliation to the inhabitants of Valle de Toluca than to earlier (Formative and Classic) populations in the Basin of Mexico.

Sugiura suggests that, from an ethnical perspective, the population from Valle de Toluca was of Otomi origin (Sugiura, 1998), the very same group who may have resided in the northern Basin of Mexico and the adjacent Valle del Mezquital during the Postclassic period (Carrasco, 1950; Fournier and Bolaños, 2007).

In this regard, the elements found at the Lake Xaltocan deposit share similarities (e.g., severed heads and phalanges) to an Epiclassic site that Fournier and Vargas-Sanders (2002) studied, Chapatongo, which they associate to the Otomi group.

Nevertheless, the biodistance difference between Valle de Toluca and Xaltocan is significant at the α = 2.4 × 10−6 level.

Hence, the remains could correspond to different populations.

To that effect, the Xaltocan crania differ greatly from those from Tlatilco (Early Formative period) and Teotihuacan (Classic period), despite their closer physical proximity to Xaltocan.

SECTION

Conclusions

PARAGRAPH

In our sample, we did not identify any biological ties of the sacrificed victims in Xaltocan to other Mesoamerican populations.

They do not seem to have shared any links to earlier populations at Teotihuacan, supporting the notion that the demographic environment was dynamic after the collapse of the larger state.

However, the Xaltocan samples also differ from earlier (Tlatilco) and contemporaneous (Valle de Toluca) populations, though they show more affinity to the latter.

It is possible that the variation of NMT among the samples we studied reflects the morphological variability that should be expected in human populations.

Nevertheless, ethnohistorical and linguistic data, point to a considerable mobility of various ethnic groups in this region such as the Nahuas and the Otopames (see Brumfiel, 2003; Lastra, 2006), which foreseeably could have characterized earlier periods (Beekman and Christensen, 2003).

In this regard, the differences we documented shed light on and support the notion that incredible demographic variability occurred in central Mexico over time.

Determining the identity of the sacrificed victims will require additional biological data, as well as the integration of other archaeological data (e.g., chemical sourcing of pottery).

Nevertheless, these first results establish an important baseline for future research.