10.1016/j.ebr.2019.100347

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Focal seizures associated with the chapeau de gendarme sign or ictal pouting of insular origin

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Frontal lobe seizures constitute nearly 30% of focal neocortical seizures [1] but remain difficult to characterize due to their complex semiology, large surface area and electrophysiological patterns [2].

One localizing sign that has been purported for frontal lobe epilepsy (FLE) is a characteristic down turning of the mouth into a deep frown, known as ictal pouting or ‘chapeau de gendarme’ (CdG) sign.

While the CdG sign is not frequently seen, researchers and clinicians have used it to localize the seizure onset zone (SOZ) to the frontal lobe [3–5].

Due to the complexity of connections with the frontal lobe, however, other regions may initiate epileptogenic networks with complex propagations to the frontal lobe thereby resulting in false localizations for this unique semiological finding.

PARAGRAPH

One other region of interest for CdG initiation is the insula lobe.

The insula has a multitude of connections with regions throughout the brain, including the frontal lobes in addition to the limbic system and the temporal- and parietal lobes.

While poorly understood until recently, the insula appears to have a diverse array of functions that serves as a network hub to coordinate cognitive domains [6].

Of interest, the insula appears to be involved in feelings including disgust and fear [7,8], two such emotions that have been associated with the CdG sign in frontal lobe seizures.

When the insula was sampled in one study, it was included in epileptic network of focal seizures associated with the CdG sign [3].

Herein, we present the case of a 17- year-old female who had frequent focal motor seizures since the age of six years with ictal semiology including the CdG sign but with electrographic origin in the insula delineated by stereoelectroencephalography (SEEG).

SECTION

Case

PARAGRAPH

The patient first presented to medical attention at the age of six years with new onset seizures lasting between 60 to 90 s and occurring up to 15 times per day.

Semiology included a CdG sign, head and eye deviation to the left, lifting of the head off the bed, apparent generalized stiffening of the body, and fear.

Twenty-one channel standard EEG demonstrated seizure onset in the anterior head region with interictal epileptiform activity over the right frontal area, suggesting right frontal onset seizures.

Hypometabolic posterior right frontal and anterior insular region was observed on FDG-PET (Fig. 1).

The patient was diagnosed with non-lesional focal epilepsy and treated with antiseizure drugs.

In retrospective when reviewing imaging following surgical resection, brain MRI showed an area not previously identified that was suspicious for focal cortical dysplasia (FCD) in the right fronto-opercular area (Fig. 1).

Surgery was not pursued at this time as she responded well to medication.

PARAGRAPH

The patient's past medical history was unremarkable and she was reaching appropriate developmental milestones over time with the exception of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder identify by neuropsychological assessment.

Her family history was unremarkable for any contributing causes.

No neurological deficits or dysmorphic features were evident on physical exam.

PARAGRAPH

Over the years, antiseizure medication changes were required to control her epilepsy due to occasional seizure relapse, including courses of lamotrigine, lacosamide, levetiracetam and clobazam.

At the age of 15 years, however, her focal motor seizures became drug-resistant and a discussion of potentially pursuing epilepsy surgery was initiated.

Long-term video-EEG monitoring was performed at that time with seizures captured that were non-localized and interictal epileptiform discharges observed maximally in the right frontal region.

Seizure semiology remained relatively constant since her initial presentation.

Brain interictal single photon emission computed tomorgraphy (SPECT) showed multi focal areas of hypoperfusion without clear predominance and ictal SPECT was unable to be obtained.

An interictal FDG-PET demonstrated stable areas of mild hypometabolism in the right hemisphere.

New hypometabolic areas were present in the nasofrontal region and right anterior-inferomedial temporal lobe when compared to a previous FDG-PET done 8 years prior.

Despite later delineating a lesion in the right fronto-opercular area the FDG-PET showed normal metabolism (Fig. 1).

Because the brain MRI was initially found to be non-lesional, SEEG was proposed.

PARAGRAPH

Invasive monitoring was performed with bilateral frontal and anterior insular SEEG electrodes (Fig. 2).

SEEG recorded nine brief focal motor seizures without impaired awareness demonstrating the CdG sign.

SEEG revealed seizure onset in the right anterior insular (RAIN) cortex.

Ripples were detected ranging from 87 Hz to –113 Hz linked with spikes and polyspikes-and-slow waves at onset (Fig. 2.

; RAIN contacts 1–4) followed a few seconds later by desynchronized activity in the right lateral orbitofrontal (RLOF) region, and to a lesser extent in the anterior and middle cingulate region during her clinical seizure (Fig. 2.

; RLOF contacts 1-6).

SEEG findings localized to the anterior insula as the SOZ with a diffused network including right frontal anterior-middle cingulate and orbital-frontal cortex.

During cortical mapping, a 12 s electrographic seizure was provoked in the RAIN electrodes (contacts 2-4) as a result of RLOF (contacts 6-7) stimulation but this was not reproducible.

Frequent after discharges were seen in RLOF (contacts 3-7) when stimulating the RAIN (contacts 2-4) as well as frequent afterdischarges in the RAIN (contacts 2-4) when the RLOF (contacts 5-6) were stimulated just prior to an electroclinical seizure.

RLOF was the closest depth to the later identified lesion on brain MRI.

PARAGRAPH

Surgical resection of the right opercular frontal and anterior insular cortex was planned with electrocorticographic guidance (ECoG).

ECoG confirmed very active frontal operculum and orbito-frontal cortical tissue helping guide the extent of cortical resection.

Pathological examination revealed focal cortical dysplasia (FCD) type IIB in the frontal operculum (Supporting material Fig. 3).

Other resected tissue was morphologically normal, aside from a few dysplastic neurons scattered throughout, particularly anterior insular cortex.

Following surgery, the patient has remained seizure free for more than 17 months.

PARAGRAPH

Surgical resection of the right frontal opercular and anterior insular cortex was performed with electrocorticographic guidance (ECoG).

ECoG revealed very active epileptiform activity in the frontal operculum and orbitofrontal cortical tissue helping guide the extent of resection.

Pathological examination revealed focal cortical dysplasia (FCD) type IIB in the frontal operculum (Supporting material Fig. 3).

Other resected tissue was morphologically normal, aside from a few dysplastic neurons scattered throughout, particularly anterior insular cortex.

Following surgery, the patient has remained seizure free for more than 17 months.

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

The ictal semiology and scalp EEG in our patient suggested the right frontal lobe as the symptomatogenic zone [9].

These findings were consistent with previous publications referring to the CdG as a localizing sign arising from the frontal lobe [3–5,10].

However, in our case, SEEG recording revealed epilepti form discharges and electrographic seizure onset in the anterior insular cortex prior to the ictal semiology and activation of the frontal lobe, demonstrating that seizures associated with the CdG sign do not always localize the SOZ to the frontal lobe.

RLOF electrodes were close to the lesion but not exactly on it and captured low and moderate amplitude epileptiform activity interictally as well as ictally suggesting network involvement but not seizure onset.

PARAGRAPH

Frontal lobe epilepsy has been relatively less well studied compared to other types of epilepsies, in part due to the heterogeneous semiology involved and the highly connected nature of the frontal lobe to other brain regions [11].

One such connection is between the frontal lobe and the insula, particularly the anterior insula [12].

Connections between these two areas allows for intricate viscerosomatic as well as higher order emotional and cognitive processing [6] but differentiating seizure onset zones between these two areas can be difficult.

First, seizure semiology can be misleading as it was in this case and for other semiologiies [13.)

We also found that focal seizures involving a CdG sign in the semiology does not always localize the SOZ to the frontal lobe.

Finally, because of its depth relative to other regions of the brain, the insula cannot be reliably delineated by scalp EEG recordings [14].

Here, SEEG recorded electrographic seizure onset from contacts implanted into the anterior insula prior to involvement of the frontal lobe when the clinical semiology involving the CdG sign became evident.

Additionally, the habitual electrographic seizure was elicited when stimulating the RLOF 6-7 electrodes depicting the seizure susceptibility of this region of the epileptic network.

These findings support the anterior insula as the SOZ and frontal lobe propagation as the symptomatogenic zone.

SEEG recordings have previously identified the insula as the SOZ in patients with focal seizures associated with atypical semiologies falsely presumed to be of frontal lobe origin[15].

In our case, had we not included the insular cortex in the SEEG recording, we would have missed the true onset of the electrographic ictal activity arising from the anterior insular cortex with the result of an incorrect localization of the SOZ to the frontal lobe and potentially suboptimal surgical resection.

PARAGRAPH

The SOZ was electrographically identified here by spikes and polyspikes in addition to prominent high frequency oscillations (HFOs) in the ripple bandwidth on SEEG (Fig. 2).

HFOs have been strongly correlated with other interictal markers of epilepsy, do not change locaton over time, and resection of these areas have been correlated with successful epilepsy surgical outcomes [16].

Thus, they are proposed to be a marker of the epileptogenic zone underlying the area of the brain that is necessary and sufficient for seizure initiation.

In our case, the location of the ripples identified on SEEG recording were present in the RAIN but not in the RLOF at seizure onset supporting the RAIN as the epileptogenic zone.

PARAGRAPH

Prior reports of patients undergoing epilepsy surgery have found resection of the SOZ in the frontal lobes involving seizures with the the CdG sign have generally resulted in positive outcomes [3,4,10].

Focal seizures involving the CdG sign may arise from the insula as identified in our case or involve the insula [3], or not involve the frontal lobe at all [13].

In the report by Souriti et al. [3], a subset of 3 of 11 patients had electrodes implanted into the insula during SEEG monitoring, all of those patients in that subset showed insular involvement in the epileptic network following frontal onset, mainly in the anterior cingulate cortex.

Leitinger et al. [13] reported a case of focal seizures involving the CdG sign without frontal lobe EEG changes, speculated other areas could produce this sign.

Had the insula been monitored in that case, Chassoux [17] posited that Leitinger may have found the insula to be the EZ – our findings provide support to this hypothesis.

PARAGRAPH

We now recommend incorporating depth electrodes in the anterior insula during SEEG monitoring in patients with focal seizures involving the CdG sign to characterize the extent of the SOZ and epileptic network.

In our patient, surgical resection of the anterior insula, frontal operculum and orbitofrontal cortex resulted in an Engel class 1A outcome.

When epilepsy surgery is appropriate for patients involving similar semiology, resection may limit the involvement and extent of the epileptic network and result in seizure freedom

SECTION

Disclosure

PARAGRAPH

None of the authors has anything to disclose.

We confirm that we have read the Journal's position on issues involved in ethical publication and affirm that this report is consistent with those guidelines.

SECTION

Ethical statement

PARAGRAPH

Verbal and written consent for publication was obtained from the patient and her parents according to Alberta Children's Hospital policies and data protection and privacy laws.

PARAGRAPH

The following is the supplementary data related to this article.

Neuropathology results.

Focal Cortical Dysplasia type IIB.

All figures are haematoxylin-eosin stained sections from the operculum.

Panel A displays a low magnification view of the entire cortical thickness.

Notice the large neurons that span but do not respect cortical layers II to VI.

Panel B is a high-magnification view of a cluster of dysplastic neurons that have irregular, coarse Nissl substance (basophilic material in cytoplasm) and irregular, sometimes multipolar cells processes (white arrow).

In the subcortical white matter (WM in panel A) are many balloon cells (cells with large, eosinophilic cytoplasm and a large nucleus having a prominent nucleolus).

Supporting material Fig. 3

PARAGRAPH

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ebr.2019.100347.