10.1016/j.jhep.2019.09.031

FULLTEXT

TITLE

CXCL13-mediated recruitment of intrahepatic CXCR5+CD8+ T cells favors viral control in chronic HBV infection

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

CD8+T cell responses are crucial to prevent and control HBV infection, but their activity is thought to be abolished during persistent HBV infection.

Thus, functional defects in CD8+T cell responses, termed exhaustion, are considered the major factor driving the chronicity of HBV infection.1

However, it is unclear how exhausted CD8+T cells are able to mediate the sustained inhibition of HBV replication in some patients with chronic HBV infection (CHB).

Accumulated data have established that the pool of exhausted CD8+T cells consists of phenotypically and functionally distinct subpopulations.2,3

Although CD8+T cells are poorly functional in chronic viral infections, they are not functionally inert.4–6

Therefore, a distinct subpopulation of CD8+T cells in chronic HBV infection should be further identified.

PARAGRAPH

Recently, a population of HIV-specific CD8+T cells expressing the C-X-C motif chemokine receptor type 5 (CXCR5) was shown to inversely correlate with serum viral levels in patients prior to antiretroviral therapy, and this subset displays more potent efficacy on viral replication than the CXCR5− cells in mice with chronic lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) infection.7

These CXCR5+CD8+T cells, which were called “follicular cytotoxic T cells”, are able to migrate to B cell follicles and exert effects on CXCR5-expressing cells, such as B cell and follicular helper T cells.8,9

These data suggest that CXCR5+CD8+T cells may exist in a reduced state of exhaustion and maintain suboptimal but critical functions, thus serving as an antiviral mechanism in chronic viral infection.

We hypothesized that this situation may also exist in patients with chronic HBV infection, and that CXCR5+CD8+T cells may have an important role for even partial immune control of HBV replication in the setting of chronic infection.

PARAGRAPH

Abundant evidence has established the concept that the liver is the main site of primary CD8+T cell activation.10,11

However, in the presence of a high intrahepatic load of HBV antigen, intrahepatic HBV-specific CD8+T cells become functionally impaired and are prone to apoptosis.

In fact, secondary lymphoid organs are critical for the priming of functional CD8+T cells.12

In animal models of chronic viral infection, a substantial accumulation of antigen-specific CXCR5+CD8+T cells was found in the lymph nodes.8

Although activation of CD8+T cells in the liver and the lymph nodes may occur independently, cell recirculation and mixing between the compartments may exist after activation.13

Thus, extrahepatic CXCR5+CD8+T cells would be directed to the liver by the action of chemokines.

For example, C-X-C motif chemokine ligand 13 (CXCL13), a chemokine of CXCR5, is known to dictate the homing and motility of CXCR5-expressing cells.

In an HBV mouse model, CXCL13 was expressed in an age-dependent manner in hepatic macrophages and was involved in hepatic lymphocyte trafficking, which plays an important role in promoting an effective immune responses against HBV.14

Thus, it is reasonable to assume that high expression of intrahepatic CXCL13 during chronic HBV infection may facilitate the trafficking of CXCR5+CD8+T cells and ultimately promote the establishment of effective immune control against HBV.

SECTION

Patients and methods

SECTION

Patients and samples

PARAGRAPH

One hundred and four patients with CHB from real-life clinical practice, 20 patients with CHB who achieved HBsAg loss following antiviral treatment, and 45 healthy controls (HCs) were recruited (Table S1).

In addition, 49 HBeAg-positive patients with CHB who participated in a clinical trial (number: CLDT600ACN07T) of telbivudine treatment for 52 weeks were enrolled:15 they were classified into either a complete response (CR; n = 11) group, if they had undergone HBeAg seroconversion and achieved serum HBV DNA levels <300 copies/ml at week 52; or a non-complete response (NCR, n = 38) group, if HBeAg remained positive (Table S2).

Sixty-six HBeAg-positive patients with CHB who received nucleos(t)ide analogue (NA) therapy and who fulfilled the stopping rules outlined in the APASL guideline were included.16

Patients who were followed for a minimum of 96 weeks after cessation of NA therapy and maintained an HBV DNA level of <2,000 IU/ml and a normal alanine aminotransferase (ALT) level were defined as non-relapsers (n = 41), while patients with an HBV DNA level of >2,000 IU/ml and an ALT level of >2x the upper limit of normal after cessation of NA therapy were defined as relapsers (n = 25) (Table S3).

Splenic tissues were obtained from 6 patients who underwent splenectomy due to HBV-related liver cirrhosis-induced hypersplenism (Table S4).

Biopsy specimens of livers from 37 treatment-naïve patients with CHB, and adjacent non-tumor tissues from 15 treatment-naïve patients with HBV-related HCC (8 were human leukocyte antigen [HLA]-A2 positive) who underwent curative hepatectomy were collected.

As controls, 34 specimens of healthy liver tissue were obtained after surgery for hepatic hemangioma (Table S5).

In addition, tonsillar tissues were obtained from 7 HBsAg-negative patients with tonsillar hypertrophy who underwent tonsillectomy.

All individuals were recruited at Nanfang Hospital (Guangzhou, China).

The exclusion criteria for these studies were coinfection with HAV, HCV, HDV, HEV, and HIV.

Patients with autoimmune liver disease and other severe or active diseases were also excluded.

This study was conducted in compliance with the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the Ethical Committee of Nanfang Hospital.

Written informed consent was obtained from all individuals.

SECTION

Mice

PARAGRAPH

C57BL/6 wild-type (WT) mice were acquired from the laboratory animal center of Southern Medical University (Guangzhou, China).

Interleukin 21 receptor knockout (IL-21R-KO) mice (Stock No: 019115) were available from the Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, Maine, USA) and µMT mice (deletion of the IgM heavy chain gene) with a C57BL/6 background were generous gifts from Professor Yu Zhang who works in Peking University Health Science Center (Beijing, China).

All animals (3–5 mice per cage) were fed with regular diet and autoclaved water and were maintained under a 12 h light/dark cycle in a specific pathogen-free animal facility at a controlled temperature (21–24 °C) and humidity (50 ± 5%).

A total of 95 male mice (6–8 weeks old) were used in this study.

All animal experiments were approved by Ethical Committee for Experimental Animal Care of the 458th Hospital of the Chinese People’s Liberation Army (PLA) (Guangzhou, China).

The studies reported in this paper are in accordance with the Animal Research: Reporting of In Vivo Experiments (ARRIVE) guidelines.

PARAGRAPH

For further details regarding the materials and methods used, please refer to the CTAT table and supplementary information.

SECTION

Results

SECTION

CXCR5+CD8+T cells are partially exhausted but possess a stronger antiviral activity than the CXCR5− subset in patients with chronic HBV infection

PARAGRAPH

First, the frequency of circulating CXCR5+CD8+T cells was detected among HCs, patients with CHB, and patients with HBsAg loss.

Compared with the former two groups, a significantly increased frequency of CXCR5+CD8+T cells was observed in patients with HBsAg loss (Fig. 1A, Fig. S2).

CXCR5+CD8+T cells from patients with chronic HBV infection showed higher expression of programmed death 1 (PD1) and cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen 4 (CTLA4) but lower expression of CD38 than those of HCs (Fig. 1B, left).

Compared with those of their counterparts in HC, CXCR5+CD8+T cells in chronic HBV infection produced lower levels of interferon (IFN)-γ and higher levels of IL-17 and Granzyme B, while this subpopulation from patients with HBsAg loss showed enhanced production of tumor necrosis factor-α, IFN-γ, and IL-2 (Fig. 1B, right).

Next, we sought to evaluate the difference between circulating CXCR5+CD8+ and CXCR5−CD8+T cells in chronic HBV infection.

We found that CXCR5+CD8+T cells expressed high levels of PD1, CTLA4, and T cell immunoglobulin and mucin domain 3 (TIM3), as well as CD38 and CD69.

In addition, increased expression of CCR7, CD45RO, and CD62L was found on the CXCR5+ subset (Fig. 1C, left).

Notably, compared to the CXCR5− subset, the CXCR5+ subset produced higher levels of IFN-γ, IL-2, IL-4, IL-17, and IL-21.

Although both subsets have a considerable number of Granzyme B+ cells, an increased frequency of Granzyme B-expressing cells was observed in the CXCR5− subset (Fig. 1C, right).

Next, RNA sequencing was performed to define the transcriptional profile of splenic CXCR5+ and CXCR5−CD8+ T cells.

We identified 1,320 transcripts that were significantly downregulated or upregulated (2-fold or more) in CXCR5+CD8+T cells relative to their expression in the CXCR5− subset (Fig. 1D).

Notably, the CXCR5+ subset had lower expression of transcripts encoding effector molecules involved in cytotoxicity, such as granzyme (GZMH), granulysin (GNLY), and perforin (PRF1), while it had higher expression of transcripts encoding tumor necrosis factor (TNF), and interferon pathway-associated molecules (MX1, MX2, GBP1, and ISG15).

In addition, selectively upregulated expression of toll-like receptors was found in this subset (Fig. 1E), this finding demonstrated that CXCR5+CD8+T cells were phenotypically and transcriptionally distinct from CXCR5−CD8+T cells.

Overall, these data indicated that CXCR5+CD8+T cells were partially exhausted but possessed functional properties in chronic HBV infection.

SECTION

Circulating CXCR5+CD8+T cells maintain decent antiviral abilities and are associated with treatment response in patients with CHB

PARAGRAPH

We further investigated the relationship between circulating CXCR5+CD8+T cells and treatment response in patients with CHB.

Interestingly, the levels of HBV DNA at week 52 showed an inverse correlation with the frequency of CXCR5+CD8+T cells at baseline and at week 12 (Fig. 2A).

Notably, the frequency of CXCR5+CD8+T cells was significantly higher in CR patients than in NCR patients both at baseline and at week 12.

Moreover, a significantly higher frequency of IFN-γ-producing CXCR5+CD8+T cells was detected in CR patients than in NCR patients both at baseline and at week 24, while no significant differences were observed at week 12 and week 52 (Fig. 2B).

We then compared the antiviral efficacy between circulating CXCR5+CD8+ and CXCR5−CD8+T cells.

Relative to that from CXCR5−CD8+T cells, a decreased level of Granzyme B but an enhanced level of IFN-γ was detected in the supernatant from CXCR5+CD8+T cells after in vitro stimulation (Fig. 2C and 2D).

Next, the supernatant obtained from the sorted cells was added to HBV-producing HepG2.2.15 cells, respectively.

Notably, we found that the addition of supernatant from the CXCR5+ subset resulted in significantly decreased expression of HBsAg and HBeAg (Fig. 2E).

Taken together, these data demonstrated that the less exhausted CXCR5+CD8+T cells exerted antiviral effects predominantly through a non-cytolytic mechanism and suggested that they may contribute to HBV control.

SECTION

Intrahepatic CXCR5+CD8+T cells display a more potent antiviral efficacy than circulating counterparts in chronic HBV infection

PARAGRAPH

Since HBV is a strictly hepatotropic pathogen and efficiently targets the liver, we further investigated the profile of intrahepatic CXCR5+CD8+T cells.

As shown in Fig. 3A, compared with their circulating counterparts, intrahepatic CXCR5+CD8+T cells exhibited much higher expression of PD1, CTLA4, and TIM3, as well as CD38, CD69, and HLA-DR.

Notably, the intrahepatic CXCR5+ subset also demonstrated an increased expression of representative chemokine receptors.

More remarkably, a higher frequency of HBV-specific IFN-γ-expressing cells was detected in intrahepatic CXCR5+CD8+T cells, relative to the intrahepatic CXCR5− subset and the circulating CXCR5+ subset (Fig. 3B).

Compared with those of CXCR5−CD8+T cells, the intrahepatic and circulating CXCR5+ subset produced higher levels of HBV-specific IL-21 (Fig. 3C).

Next, the frequency and phenotype of HBV-specific intrahepatic CXCR5+CD8+ and CXCR5−CD8+T cells were detected by pentamer staining.

Compared with that of the CXCR5− subset, a significant increase of HBV-specific CD8+T cells was found in the CXCR5+ subset (Fig. 3D).

Additionally, HBV-specific intrahepatic CXCR5+CD8+T cells showed elevated expression of PD1, CD38, CD69, CD62L, and CCR7 as well as chemokine receptors CCR2 and CXCR2 (Fig. 3E).

Similarly, the expression of these markers was also upregulated in global intrahepatic CXCR5+CD8+T cells (Fig. S3).

Taken together, these data indicated that intrahepatic CXCR5+CD8+T cells may have a more potent antiviral effect against HBV than circulating counterparts.

SECTION

High levels of CXCL13 promote the recruitment of CXCR5+CD8+T cells and are highly relevant for favorable outcome

PARAGRAPH

We next investigated how CXCR5+CD8+T cells gained access to the liver.

The profile of intrahepatic CXCL13 was assessed.

Compared with that of the controls, a significantly higher mRNA level of intrahepatic CXCL13 was found in treatment-naïve patients with CHB (Fig. 4A), and mRNA expression of intrahepatic CXCL13 was positively correlated with serum levels of ALT (Fig. 4B).

Then, intrahepatic gene expression of a series of chemokines in patients with CHB and HBeAg-positive patients with chronic HBV infection (eAg+CInf, previously termed “immune tolerant”) was analyzed by using a GEO RNA-seq dataset (GSE65359).

Notably, CXCL13 expression was upregulated significantly more in patients with CHB than in eAg+CInf patients, and expression of other representative markers also increased in patients with CHB (Fig. 4C).

Then, immunohistochemical staining of serial sections from liver samples of patients with CHB was performed.

A positive CXCL13 staining was observed, and an accumulation of CXCR5+, CD4+, CD8+, and CD19+ cells could also be detected.

Quantitative analysis revealed a significantly increased number of positively stained cells in patients with CHB (Fig. S4).

Notably, a positive correlation between CXCR5+ cells and CXCL13+ cells was found in patients with CHB (Fig. 4D).

Next, we analyzed the relationship between intrahepatic and peripheral CXCL13, and a positive correlation between the mRNA expression of intrahepatic CXCL13 and serum levels of CXCL13 was found (Fig. 4E).

It is worth noting that serum levels of CXCL13 were significantly higher in CR patients than in NCR patients at baseline, week 12, and week 52 after antiviral treatment (Fig. 4F).

Notably, serum levels of CXCL13 were also closely correlated with the long-term virological response of patients with CHB (non-relapser) after termination of antiviral treatment (Fig. 4G).

Collectively, these data suggested that high levels of intrahepatic CXCL13 promoted the trafficking of CXCR5+ lymphocytes to the liver and thus conferred a beneficial milieu for CXCR5+CD8+T cells to fight against HBV-infected hepatocytes.

SECTION

CXCR5+CD8+T cells inhibit the expression of HBsAg in an HBV mouse model

PARAGRAPH

Next, an HBV mouse model established by pAAV-HBV1.2 hydrodynamic injection (HDI) was used for further investigation.

We found that the frequency of CXCR5+CD8+T cells in the spleen and liver was higher than that in the blood (Fig. 5A).

Upregulated expression of PD1, CCR7, CD62L, and inducible costimulatory molecule (ICOS) was observed in the CXCR5+ subset (Fig. 5B, left).

Intracellular cytokine staining revealed that CXCR5+CD8+T cells from the spleen and liver produced more IFN-γ and IL-21 (Fig. 5B, right).

We next detected the intrahepatic expression of CXCL13 in the HBV mouse model (Fig. 5C), and we found that the mice with pAAV-HBV1.2 HDI showed enhanced expression of CXCL13 in the liver (Fig. 5D and 5E).

We then transferred sorted CXCR5+CD8+ and CXCR5−CD8+T cells into recipient mice with HBV expression.

First, sorted cells were fluorescently labeled with CellTrackerTM Red CMTPX and their chemotaxis was analyzed (Fig. 5F).

We found that, relative to the CXCR5− subset, a higher frequency of transferred CXCR5+CD8+T cells were present in the liver at 24 h and 48 h after transfer (Fig. 5G and 5H).

We then further explored the antiviral effect of CXCR5+CD8+T cells in vivo (Fig. 5I).

Importantly, we found that serum levels of HBsAg were significantly decreased in the mice that received CXCR5+CD8+T cells compared to those of mice that received CXCR5−CD8+T cells (Fig. 5J).

Although relatively high levels of antibody to HBcAg (anti-HBc) were quantified in recipients that received CXCR5+ cells, there was no significant difference between the 2 groups (Fig. 5K).

In summary, these results suggested that CXCR5+CD8+T cells preferentially migrated to the liver and showed potent antiviral effect.

SECTION

PD1 blockade and IL-21 addition restore the function of CXCR5+CD8+T cells

PARAGRAPH

As IL-21 is closely related to the germinal center reaction and high expression of PD1 was observed on CXCR5+CD8+T cells, we investigated the influence of IL-21 signaling and PD1 blockade on CXCR5+CD8+T cells.

Compared with that of CXCR5−CD8+T cells, the expression of IL-21R was increased on CXCR5+CD8+T cells both in the liver and blood from patients with HBV-related HCC (Fig. 6A).

After in vitro stimulation with IL-21, an enhanced production of IFN-γ from circulating CXCR5+CD8+T cells was observed both in HCs and patients with CHB.

Strikingly, increased IFN-γ production from CXCR5+CD8+T cells was observed in patients with CHB (10 of 15 showed increased pattern) but not in HCs after PD1 blockade.

Similar effects were also observed in CXCR5−CD8+T cells (Fig. 6B).

Additionally, we analyzed the effects of combined IL-21 treatment and PD1, CTLA4 or TIM3 blockade.

Compared with anti-PD1, anti-CTLA4, or anti-TIM3 treatment alone, the combination with IL-21 resulted in enhanced production of IFN-γ from circulating CXCR5+CD8+ T cells in patients with CHB, however, the joint effect was not superior to IL-21 treatment alone in this setting (Fig. 6C).

Next, IL-21R-KO mice with pAAV-HBV1.2 HDI were used to assess the influence of IL-21 on CXCR5+CD8+T cells.

Surprisingly, no significant difference was observed in the frequency of CXCR5+CD8+T cells between WT and IL-21R-KO mice (Fig. 6D, left), while a significant decrease in the frequency of HBV-specific IFN-γ-expressing CXCR5+CD8+T cells was found in the blood and liver of IL-21R-KO mice compared to those of WT mice (Fig. 6D, right).

These data indicated that PD1 blockade and exogenous IL-21 could restore the function of CXCR5+CD8+T cells in chronic HBV infection.

SECTION

CXCR5+CD8+T cells aid antibody production and their function is regulated by B cell signaling

PARAGRAPH

We next investigated the role of CXCR5+CD8+T cells in providing help for humoral immunity.

Firstly, tonsil lymphocytes from HBsAg-negative patients were sorted as shown in Fig. 7A. Not surprisingly, the highest concentration of IgG in supernatants was quantitated in the setting of CXCR5+CD4+ T cells.

Intriguingly, the coculture of CXCR5+CD8+T and CD19+B cells resulted in higher levels of IgG than that of CXCR5−CD8+T cells.

Correspondingly, the highest levels of IL-21 in supernatants were found in the coculture with CXCR5+CD4+ T cells, while there were significantly increased levels of IL-21 in the coculture with CXCR5+CD8+T cells compared to the coculture with the CXCR5− subset (Fig. 7B).

Afterwards, splenic lymphocytes from patients who underwent splenectomy due to HBV-related liver cirrhosis were sorted as shown, to clarify the role of CXCR5+CD8+T cells in the generation of HBV-related antibodies using an ELISPOT assay.

Relative to coculture with CXCR5−CD8+ T cells, coculture of autologous B cells with CXCR5+CD8+T cells demonstrated an increasing trend in the frequency of anti-HBc-secreting B cells (Fig. 7C), indicating a relatively strong ability of CXCR5+CD8+T cells to support B cell responses.

However, B cells secreting antibody to HBsAg (anti-HBs) were barely detectable in this coculture condition (data not shown).

Finally, μMT mice (B cell-deficient) with pAAV-HBV1.2 HDI were used to investigate the influence of B cells on CXCR5+CD8+T cells.

The frequency of CXCR5+CD8+T cells in the liver and spleen from μMT mice was lower than that of WT mice (Fig. 7D, left).

Remarkably, a significantly decreased frequency of HBV-specific IFN-γ+CXCR5+CD8+T cells was detected in the blood and liver of the μMT mice (Fig. 7D, right).

Taken together, these data suggested that CXCR5+CD8+T cells had the capacity to support B cell responses and that B cell signaling was required for the maintenance of functional CXCR5+CD8+T cells.

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

The failure of the immune system to control virus replication is typically attributed to the inability of effector CD8+T cell function.

However, this concept is challenged by recent clinical and experimental studies performed in HIV and LCMV infection showing that a subset of exhausted CD8+T cells expressing CXCR5 played an important role in the control of viral replication.7–9

In this study, we found that CXCR5+CD8+T cells, especially the intrahepatic CXCR5+ subset, retain effector functions characterized by enhanced production of HBV-specific IFN-γ and IL-21.

Notably, PD1 blockade and exogenous IL-21 enhance the production of IFN-γ from CXCR5+CD8+T cells; additionally, this subpopulation also displays a more potent antiviral activity than the CXCR5− subset, by inhibiting HBsAg expression and supporting antibody production by B cells.

Thus, our data support the notion that CXCR5+CD8+T cells display a reduced state of exhaustion and maintain decent antiviral capabilities in chronic HBV infection.

Notably, we also found that high levels of CXCL13 might sustain a persistent virological response in patients with CHB.

This data further supports the notion that CXCL13 serves as a critical chemokine not only for the recruitment of CXCR5+CD8+T cells but also for immune control of chronic HBV infection (Fig. S6).

PARAGRAPH

Generally, cytokine-mediated non-cytolytic effects inhibit HBV replication more efficiently.17

High levels of IFN-γ and lower levels of Granzyme B from CXCR5+CD8+T cells suggest that the functional activity of this subset is consistent with a cytokine-producing effector function rather than a classical killer function.

Based on the distinct transcriptional profile of CXCR5+ and CXCR5−CD8+ T cells, we speculate that the divergence of functional properties between the 2 subsets may be regulated by specific cellular signaling pathways, which warrants further investigation.

In addition, the CXCR5+ subset, both in the periphery and liver, was characterized by higher expression of molecules related to the profile of memory potential.

Generally, memory CD8+T cells are a long-lived population that are antigen-specific and provide an enhanced protective response upon antigen re-encounter.18,19

The high expression of CD62L and CCR7 in CXCR5+CD8+T cells in human and mice suggests that this subset preferentially displays features of central memory cells.

Thus, the phenotypic and functional data collectively suggest that CXCR5+CD8+T cells are a distinct subset with memory potential that exert antiviral activity primarily through a non-cytolytic mechanism.

PARAGRAPH

One observation that deserves special attention is the high expression of inhibitory receptors in CXCR5+CD8+T cells; generally, they are considered hallmarks of T cell exhaustion and to be tightly linked with decreased cytokine production, particularly in the context of chronic viral infections.

However, the high production of IFN-γ derived from CXCR5+CD8+T cells is not consistent with this concept.

In fact, inhibitory receptors can also be expressed by more functional effector or memory T cells20,21 and may even have context-dependent costimulatory functions.22

The detected HBV-specific CD8+T cells from patients with lower levels of HBV viremia were mostly PD1 positive.23,24

Similarly, HBV-specific CD8+T cells present in the blood of patients with CHB who did not suffer from disease flares were selectively enriched for a PD1+T cell population and these cells were functional.25

Interestingly, a recent study demonstrated that PD1 promotes follicular helper T cell concentrations in the germinal center territory,26 indicating a more complex effect of PD1 on cell regulation.

Although our findings suggest that PD1 negatively regulates the activity of CXCR5+CD8+T cells (Fig. 6B), the definite role of PD1 during different stages of HBV infection and its regulation on CXCR5+CD8+T cells warrants further investigation.

Notably, upregulation of CTLA4 and TIM3 expression could be observed on CD8+T cells following activation.27,28

A study of human CD8+T cells demonstrated that the expression of various inhibitory receptors depends more dominantly on activation and differentiation.21

Collectively, these findings support the notion that expression of inhibitory receptors does not exclusively mark dysfunctional CXCR5+CD8+T cells, but rather is tightly linked to the activation and differentiation of these cells.

PARAGRAPH

The existing evidence has shown an uncontemplated role of CD8+T cells in providing help for humoral immunity.29,30

Of the cytokines we assessed, IL-21 is of great interest as it is pivotal for antibody production.

Our previous work has verified that IL-21 represents a major mediator of the beneficial function of CXCR5+CD4+T cells in promoting the generation of antibody to HBeAg.31

Notably, IL-21-producing CD8+T cells could facilitate the production of protective virus-specific IgG antibodies in mice with influenza virus infection,30 and CXCR5+CD8+T cells have an underappreciated capacity to support B cell responses, at least in part through the production of IL-21.32

Intriguingly, the current study found high expression of IL-21 in CXCR5+CD8+T cells in HBV infection and documented a beneficial role of human tonsil-derived CXCR5+CD8+T cells in promoting IgG production.

Thus, it is reasonable to speculate that this subset serves as a valuable part of the humoral immune response.

Due to the limitations of available samples from patients with chronic HBV infection and the rarely detected quantity of HBV-specific CXCR5+CD8+T cells, we could not determine whether CXCR5+CD8+T cells could assist B cells with the generation of anti-HBs through IL-21; further experiments are needed to investigate this notion.

PARAGRAPH

The present study also shows a significantly increased expression of intrahepatic CXCL13 mRNA in patients with CHB, which indicates the close relationship between liver inflammation and the generation of CXCL13.33

Additionally, the positive correlation between the mRNA levels of intrahepatic CXCL13 and ALT indicates the generation of CXCL13 occurs in inflammatory sites where CXCR5+ lymphocytes might be recruited.

The activation of CXCR5+CD8+T cells can take place in the liver and lymph nodes, cell recirculation and mixing may exist after activation.

In this condition, CD8+T cells expressing CXCR5 could be migrated toward a source with high expression of CXCL13, such as the liver.

Therefore, we consider that there may be an overlap between CXCL13-mediated migration of CXCR5+CD8+T cells and the activation process of these cells.

Although immunohistochemical staining shows that there is no obvious overlap or colocalization between the CXCL13 signal and CXCR5+ cell staining, a positive correlation between CXCR5+ and CXCL13+ cells in patients with CHB highlight their close relationship.

Notably, high levels of CXCL13 were found in patients with CHB with sustained remission after discontinuation of antiviral therapy, indicating that the CXCL13-triggered immune response against HBV contributes to the maintenance of viral control.

Thus, the findings presented here provide further evidence to support the notion that CXCL13 serves as an important chemokine for the immune control of HBV infection.

PARAGRAPH

In summary, we herein described a specialized subset of CD8+ T cells expressing CXCR5 that retain functional capacity in chronic HBV infection.

These cells can be recruited by the chemokine CXCL13, and both of them show close correlations with favorable treatment responses in patients with CHB.

These results indicate that the CXCR5+ subset is a functional subpopulation within the bulk of dysfunctional CD8+T cells and possibly maintains ongoing immune-surveillance in persistent HBV infection.

The identification of this unique subpopulation may contribute to a better understanding of CD8+T cell functions and has implications for the development of an immunotherapeutic strategy to optimize the available antiviral therapies in chronic HBV infection.

SECTION

Abbreviations

PARAGRAPH

ALT, alanine aminotransferase; anti-HBc, antibody to HBcAg; anti-HBs, antibody to HBsAg; CHB, chronic hepatitis B; CR, complete response; CTLA4, cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen 4; CXCL13, C-X-C motif chemokine ligand 13; CXCR5, C-X-C motif chemokine receptor type 5; HC, healthy control; HDI, hydrodynamic injection; HLA, human leukocyte antigen; ICOS, inducible costimulatory molecule; IFN-γ, interferon-γ; IL-21R-KO, interleukin-21 receptor knockout; LCMV, lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus; NA, nucleos(t)ide analogue; NCR, non-complete response; PBMCs, peripheral blood mononuclear cells; PD1, programmed death 1; PLA, People's Liberation Army; TIM3, T cell immunoglobulin and mucin domain 3; TNF-α, tumor necrosis factor-α; WT, wild type.

SECTION

Financial support

PARAGRAPH

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (81770592, 81671570, and 81572000), National Science and Technology Major Project of China (2017ZX10202202-004, 2018ZX10301202), and Outstanding Youths Development Scheme of Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University (2015J001).

SECTION

Conflict of interest

PARAGRAPH

JLH has received consulting fee from AbbVie, Arbutus, Bristol Myers Squibb, Gilead Sciences, Johnson & Johnson, Roche, GlaxoSmithKline and received grants from Bristol Myers Squibb, Novartis, and Johnson & Johnson.

The other authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.

PARAGRAPH

Please refer to the accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.

SECTION

Authors’ contributions

PARAGRAPH

YYL, LBT, CCC, and JLH designed the study.

YYL, LBT, LG, CCC, SQG, YZ, and GFY performed the experiments and analyses.

LG, SQG, YZ, GFY, XYL, and WBW collected samples and laboratory data.

XXL, YW, XHP, GZL, XYZ, JS, and JP provided materials.

YYL, LBT, CCC, and SQG wrote the manuscript.

XYZ, JS, and JLH critically reviewed the manuscript.

JLH supervised the study.