10.1016/j.jhep.2019.03.032

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma in HIV/HBV-coinfected patients on tenofovir therapy: Relevance for screening strategies

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is the most important cause of liver cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) worldwide.1

In high-income settings, between 5 and 10% of HIV-infected individuals are coinfected with HBV, which is a major cause of severe morbidity and mortality in this population.2

HIV infection accelerates the progression of HBV-related liver disease and mortality is higher among HIV/HBV-coinfected individuals compared to HBV-monoinfected ones.3

While the incidence of HBV-related HCC is estimated to range between 0.1 and 0.4% per year among non-cirrhotics and to be above 3% per year among cirrhotics, it is uncertain if the risk of developing HCC is different among HIV/HBV-coinfected individuals.4

In fact, many factors which have a profound impact on HBV-related HCC incidence, including age, sex, liver cirrhosis, HBV viral load, hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg) and hepatitis delta virus (HDV)-coinfection, are distributed differently among HIV-infected individuals compared to HIV-uninfected ones.5–8

PARAGRAPH

International guidelines recommend the initiation of tenofovir-containing antiretroviral therapy (ART) in all HIV-infected individuals who are positive for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg).

Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (TDF) is very successful in suppressing HBV replication, independent of HIV infection, although treatment response seems to be slightly delayed in HIV/HBV-coinfected individuals.8–10

Importantly, no clinically relevant HBV-related resistance to TDF has been described to date.11

The use of the potent nucleos(t)ide analogs (NAs) TDF and entecavir (ETV) has been associated with a reduced incidence of HCC among HBV-infected patients in Europe and Asia.12,13

Among 325 cirrhotic HBV-infected patients treated with TDF or ETV, the HCC incidence rate within the first 5 years (3.22% per year) was higher than that beyond 5 years of therapy (1.57% per year), suggesting a potential decrease in HCC risk with long-term suppression of HBV replication.12

Furthermore, recent data from South Korea suggest that HCC incidence is further decreased, albeit not eliminated, in the event of HBsAg loss during NA therapy, also defined as the functional cure of HBV infection.14

PARAGRAPH

HCC surveillance through 6-monthly ultrasound imaging aims at reducing mortality by diagnosing small lesions that are potentially curable by resection, ablation or transplantation,4,15 Whereas the natural history of hepatitis C virus (HCV)-related HCC is largely driven by liver cirrhosis, HBV-related HCC also develops in non-cirrhotic individuals, which makes surveillance strategies more complex.

Current recommendations for HBV-related HCC surveillance are mainly based on incidence estimated in untreated HBV-monoinfected patients.

It is generally accepted that screening is cost-effective in sub-populations with an incidence >0.2%/year, such as individuals with cirrhosis, Asian males >40 years, Asian females >50 years and Africans.

Among treated HBV-infected Caucasians, the recently established PAGE-B score seems to be particularly helpful in evaluating the risk of HCC and potential indication for HCC screening.4,16

However, this score has not been evaluated among HIV/HBV-coinfected individuals to date.

Furthermore, as the large majority of HIV/HBV-coinfected patients are expected to have a suppressed HBV viral load on a TDF-containing ART, it is unknown if this large patient group would benefit from HCC screening.

We explored the long-term incidence of HCC during NA therapy in the largest collaborative study on HIV/HBV-coinfection in Europe to date.

In order to inform HCC screening strategies among HIV/HBV-coinfected individuals on TDF-containing ART, we assessed the risk of HCC in sub-populations categorized by age, sex and the presence of liver cirrhosis.

SECTION

Materials and methods

SECTION

Study setting

PARAGRAPH

Patients from the following 4 prospective European HIV cohorts were included: The Swiss HIV cohort study (SHCS, www.shcs.ch),17 EuroSIDA (www.chip.dk/Ongoing-Studies/EuroSIDA/About),18 Athena Observational Cohort Study (www.hiv-monitoring.nl/english/),19 and ANRS CO3 Aquitaine Cohort.20

Detailed information on demographics, mode of HIV acquisition, risk behavior, clinical events, laboratory measurements, viral hepatitis coinfections, and on the full treatment history for HBV and HIV infections were collected using standard protocols at registration and at intervals of 3 to 6 months.

Local ethical committees of all participating study sites approved the cohort studies and written or verbal consent was obtained from all participants, as appropriate according to local regulations.

SECTION

Inclusion criteria, definitions and outcomes

PARAGRAPH

We included all HIV-infected adults with a positive hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) test and a complete ART history available.

Patients were categorized according to the HBV-activity of their ART regimen: (i) no active drug, or first generation drugs, such as lamivudine (LAM) or emtricitabine only (referred to as the “no TDF group”); or (ii) second-generation drugs, including TDF and ETV (referred to as the “TDF group”, as only 35 patients were on ETV).

Patients who did not start TDF at any time-point were grouped together as the incidence of HCC was similar in those on LAM or no HBV therapy, according to preliminary analyses in this patient population.21

Individual follow-up was measured from the date of inclusion into one of the cohorts until the date of database closure (01.01.2015), HCC diagnosis, death, or loss to follow-up, whichever happened first.

PARAGRAPH

Our primary outcome was the occurrence of HCC at any time-point during follow-up.

In all participating cohorts, data on causes of death and confirmation of HCC diagnosis were collected on standardized case-report forms, using information from medical hospitalizations, imaging studies or liver histology from biopsy to inform and validate the diagnosis.

Liver cirrhosis was defined primarily according to histology reports from liver biopsies or as a liver stiffness measurement (LSM) >11 kPa.22

If these 2 measurements were not available, we classified participants into the group with cirrhosis if the AST-to-platelet ratio index (APRI) was >2.0, as recommended by the World Health Organization.22

SECTION

Statistical analyses

PARAGRAPH

We described demographic and clinical characteristics using absolute numbers and proportions, or medians and interquartile ranges (IQR), and compared them between patients in the “TDF group” and those in the “non-TDF group” using Chi-square or Mann-Whitney U tests, as appropriate.

The incidence of HCC was described for the full population and compared between sub-groups according to the main demographic and clinical characteristics.

Non-parametric cumulative hazard plots were used to assess crude risk of HCC across the 2 HBV treatment groups.

In order to predict the incidence rate ratio of HCC during therapy for both groups, we fitted a Poisson regression model, stratified by cumulative time on therapy.

Individuals could contribute follow-up time to different NAs if they were switched from 1 drug to another.

PARAGRAPH

Among patients on TDF-containing ART, we explored graphically the incidence of HCC according to the presence of liver cirrhosis and the PAGE-B score.16

The latter is based only on baseline patients’ age, sex and platelets, and is a reliable score for prediction of the 5-year HCC risk in Caucasian HBV-infected patients under ETV or TDF.

As proposed in the most recent EASL guidelines, we used the PAGE-B score cut-off <10 vs. ≥10.11

We evaluated the association between HCC and potential risk factors, including age, sex, time-updated CD4 cell counts, probable mode of HIV transmission, ethnicity (Caucasian vs. non-Caucasian), HCV infection, the respective cohort, cumulative time off TDF (i.e. time from inclusion to first initiation of TDF), and liver cirrhosis, using univariable and multivariable Poisson regression analyses.

Derived adjusted incidence rate ratios for HCC were shown graphically in a Forest plot.

In order to inform HCC screening strategies for HIV/HBV-coinfected individuals starting TDF-containing ART, we predicted the cumulative incidence of HCC in specific population sub-groups in relation to the widely used incidence threshold for HCC screening (2 cases per 1,000 patient-years [py]).15

The sub-groups were selected according to the results of the multivariable analyses.

Where appropriate, generalized additive models were fitted using restricted cubic splines for continuous variables.

PARAGRAPH

HDV infection and HBeAg-positivity have both been associated with a higher incidence of HCC in previous studies.6,7

To assess the impact of these 2 characteristics on the incidence of HCC, we repeated the main analyses in the cohorts with data available.

In order to avoid relevant selection bias, we only included cohorts in which more than 60% of their patients had data available.

To further explore potential differences in results between patients infected with HCV and others, we also repeated the analyses after having excluded HIV/HBV/HCV-coinfected individuals.

All statistical analyses were performed using R (Version 3.4).

SECTION

Results

SECTION

Description of study population and overall HCC incidence

PARAGRAPH

Of the 3,625 HIV/HBV-coinfected individuals included in this study, 2,593 (71.5%) had received TDF or ETV during follow-up.

Overall, 40.3% of the cumulative follow-up time was spent on TDF, 30.5% on LAM only and 29.2% on ART without HBV activity.

Table 1 compares the main characteristics of patients in the “TDF group” with those of individuals in the “no TDF group”.

Age and sex distribution were similar across treatment groups, but individuals from the “no TDF group” were more likely to be Caucasian, injection drug users (IDU), and to be HCV-coinfected.

Importantly, HIV/HBV-coinfected individuals who never received TDF had a shorter median follow-up time compared to those on TDF (5 vs. 9.8 years), and the majority of them had their last follow-up visit before 2009, whereas most patients on TDF were still in care at the time of analyses (Table 1).

Over 32,673 py, 60 individuals (1.7%) developed an HCC, resulting in an overall incidence of 1.84 per 1,000 py (95% CI 1.40–2.36).

The incidence rate of HCC remained stable over time when patients used TDF (adjusted incidence rate ratio [aIRR] per additional year: 0.95, 95% CI 0.85–1.06, Fig. 1), whereas it increased steadily during the time patients were not on TDF (aIRR: 1.14, 95% CI 1.07–1.21).

The relatively constant incidence of HCC during TDF therapy allowed us to assess the long-term HCC risk based on characteristics at the time of TDF initiation.

SECTION

Incidence of HCC among HIV/HBV-coinfected individuals on TDF and related risk factors

PARAGRAPH

Overall, 2,593 patients had ever received TDF and their median follow-up time was 9.8 years (IQR 5.7–14.5).

Eighty-four percent of participants in the “TDF group” were male and 54% were men who have sex with men (MSM) (Table 1).

Liver cirrhosis was diagnosed in 24% of patients on TDF.

The diagnosis of cirrhosis was made with the use of liver biopsy in 8% of cases, transient elastography in 19% of them, and APRI score in the remainder.

Their median CD4 cell count at initiation of TDF was 332 cells/µl (IQR 190–498) and their median age was 37 years (IQR 31–44).

Over 3,393 py, 20 cirrhotic individuals on TDF developed HCC (5.90 per 1,000 py, 95% CI 3.60–9.10), whereas the incidence of HCC was 1.17 per 1,000 py (95% CI 0.56–2.14) in non-cirrhotic individuals on TDF.

The distribution of HCC cases in patients on TDF according to cirrhosis status and PAGE-B score is shown in Fig. 2.

Among non-cirrhotic patients with a PAGE-B score ≥10, the incidence of HCC was 1.3 per 1,000 py, whereas the estimate for non-cirrhotics with a PAGE-B score <10 was 0.8 per 1,000 py.

Two non-cirrhotic patients with a PAGE-B score <10 developed an HCC: a 37-year old, non-Caucasian female and a 38-year old Caucasian male, both after approximately 5 years of follow-up.

At initiation of TDF-containing ART, only age (aIRR per 10-year increase: 2.2, 95% CI 1.6–3.0) and the presence of liver cirrhosis (aIRR: 4.5, 95% CI 2.3–8.9) were significant predictors of the occurrence of HCC (Fig. 3, Table S1).

Sex (aIRR: 0.7, 95% CI 0.2–2.4, ref: male) and ethnicity (aIRR: 1.6, 95% CI 0.6–4.6, ref: Caucasian) did not predict HCC incidence.

PARAGRAPH

As HCC incidence remains approximately constant during follow-up on TDF-containing ART (Fig. 1), we predicted the risk of developing an HCC after initiation of TDF-containing ART for patients with and without cirrhosis, across the age spectrum at the time of starting TDF (Fig. 4).

In patients with cirrhosis, the incidence was above 2 cases per 1,000 py across the age span.

However, among patients without cirrhosis, the HCC screening threshold was only crossed in patients aged >45 years at initiation of TDF-containing ART.

However, the 95% CI included estimates above the incidence of 2 cases per 1,000 py for all ages at TDF initiation.

SECTION

Sensitivity analyses

PARAGRAPH

In an analysis of 1,035 patients on TDF with HDV serology results available from the SHCS and EuroSIDA, including 130 (12.6%) with a positive anti-HDV test, we observed that 6 (4.6%) HIV/HBV/HDV-coinfected patients experienced an event of HCC, whereas 11 (1.2%) had an HCC event in the HDV-negative group (p = 0.01).

In multivariable analyses, HDV infection was not significantly associated with HCC (aIRR: 2.53, 95% CI 0.76–8.46, p = 0.13).

Furthermore, among 1,571 patients with available data on HBeAg in the Aquitaine and Athena cohorts, 19/821 (2.3%) HBeAg-positive individuals developed an HCC, whereas 6/750 (0.8%) HBeAg-negative did.

HBeAg and HCC were not associated in multivariable analyses (aIRR: 2.17, 95% CI 0.85–5.58, p = 0.11).

Finally, after the exclusion of 490 HCV-coinfected individuals on TDF, we found an incidence of HCC of 3.83 (95% CI 2.19–6.21) per 1,000 py in the cirrhosis group and 0.74 (95% CI 0.38–1.29) in the non-cirrhotic group.

The association between liver cirrhosis and HCC remained similar to the original analysis in the whole study population (aIRR: 5.44, 95% CI 2.45–12.08).

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

We present HCC incidence estimates from the largest collaborative analysis, to date, of HIV/HBV-coinfected individuals on currently recommended first-line NAs.

Among over 2,500 patients on TDF or ETV, the incidence of HCC was 5.9 per 1,000 py in cirrhotic patients and 1.2 per 1,000 py among those without cirrhosis.

After the initiation of TDF, the incidence of HCC remained stable over time, suggesting that an assessment of HCC risk at TDF start would be adequate to inform long-term individual HCC screening strategies.

Our results show that HIV/HBV-coinfected patients without cirrhosis, starting TDF-containing ART when aged <46 years old, remain at an HCC risk below 2 per 1,000 py, which is generally accepted as the threshold below which screening is not recommended.

However, our findings highlight the need to better understand HCC risk factors in non-cirrhotic patients as the risk of HCC was not zero in this category, even in patients with a low risk based on the PAGE-B score.

Our results also provide estimates for individualized decisions on HCC screening in non-cirrhotics.

PARAGRAPH

In our study, the incidence of HCC remained stable during TDF therapy, in line with the results from a large multi-center European study of HBV-monoinfected individuals.12

In contrast, incidence in those without TDF increased steadily over time.

Our results justify the approach of evaluating the HCC risk at the time of initiation of potent NA therapy, and to decide on a surveillance strategy based on this assessment.

Papatheodoridis et al. showed a clear decrease in HCC incidence after 5 years of NA therapy among patients with liver cirrhosis.

Unfortunately, we were unable to explore the presence of such a trend in our cohort of HIV/HBV-coinfected individuals due to the limited number of events.

PARAGRAPH

As expected, the incidence of HCC among cirrhotic patients was above 2 cases per 1,000 py, independently of age at TDF start.

In comparison, HCC incidence among non-cirrhotics was lower, even though the upper margin of the confidence interval was above the proposed screening threshold in all age groups.

In the absence of cirrhosis, HCC risk seems to be driven by specific risk factors, including age at TDF start.

In a multi-country cohort of HBV-monoinfected Caucasians, age was an important risk factor of HCC overall, while male sex was a significant predictor in non-cirrhotics only.23

Several specificities of our study population may explain some of the differences between our results and those from cohorts of HBV-monoinfected individuals, including the absence of an association between sex and HCC.

Our study only included HIV-infected individuals, one-half of whom were MSM with generally good access to health-care services.

Furthermore, >20% of our patients were of non-Caucasian origin.

As the epidemiology of HCC is expected to be different in this sub-population, especially if exposed to other risk factors such as aflatoxin, longitudinal data from HCC screening programs from sub-Saharan Africa are urgently needed.24

PARAGRAPH

As HCC screening is costly and can lead to unnecessary interventions, low-risk groups in which surveillance is not necessary need to be defined.

The PAGE-B score, recently developed in a European multi-country cohort study and based on age, sex and platelet count, was shown to perform well in selecting patients with low risk for HCC.16

Among patients with a score <10, the cumulative incidence of HCC was 0%, both in the derivation and the validation datasets.

As a consequence, this score was integrated into decision algorithms for recommendations on HCC surveillance in HBV-monoinfected populations without cirrhosis.4

In our study, 2 non-cirrhotic patients with a low PAGE-B score (<10), including 1 Caucasian, developed an HCC after approximately 5 years of follow-up.

Although the numbers are low, these findings contrast with data from HBV-monoinfected cohorts.

Previous experience with validating predictive scores derived from HBV-monoinfected cohorts has shown that similar proficiency can generally not be expected in HIV-infected populations.

For instance, non-invasive scores used to predict liver fibrosis among HBV-infected individuals were not shown to be adaptable to HIV-infected populations.25

In order to achieve a decent risk stratification of HIV/HBV-coinfected populations, a thorough assessment of the proficiency of the PAGE-B score in this population is essential, and the potential development of another score, better adapted to this specific patient population must be evaluated.

PARAGRAPH

We provide robust estimates on HCC incidence from a large, multi-country study of HIV/HBV-coinfected individuals in Europe.

As current recommendations for HBV-related HCC screening are based on estimates from HBV-monoinfected populations, our data will inform clinical monitoring strategies for HIV/HBV-coinfected patients and shape future research questions in the field.

Unfortunately, we did not have access to systematically measured HBV DNA values during TDF-containing ART.

Although previous studies have shown high rates of HBV suppression on TDF-containing ART, we cannot exclude that a small proportion of patients had a sustained viral replication, a well-known risk factor for the development of HCC.10,26,27

The limited availability of data on HDV infection, as well as on HBeAg serology, was an additional limitation of our study, as both markers are drivers of HCC and liver-related mortality among HBV-infected patients.6,7

However, in sensitivity analyses limited to cohorts with data available, we did not find significant associations between these markers and HCC.

Finally, although it would have been important to analyze the risk of HCC in specific sub-populations of non-cirrhotics to guide HCC surveillance strategies, our sample size and number of events were low, especially in certain patient groups such as women and individuals of African origin.

SECTION

Conclusions

PARAGRAPH

As most HIV/HBV-coinfected individuals currently in care in high-income countries are non-cirrhotic with a suppressed HBV viral load on a TDF-containing regimen, it is of major importance to have reliable HCC incidence estimates to guide HCC surveillance.

Our data suggest that the incidence of HCC is low in this group of patients, especially if TDF is initiated early during the course of disease.

However, HCC events still occur in these patients and it will be important to further assess risk factors and derive predictive scores for HCC, tailored to HIV/HBV-coinfected populations.

SECTION

Financial support

PARAGRAPH

EuroSIDA was supported by the European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme for research, technological development and demonstration under EuroCoord grant agreement n˚ 260694.

Current support includes unrestricted grants by ViiV Healthcare LLC, GlaxoSmithKline R&D Limited, Janssen Scientific Affairs, Janssen R&D, Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp, Gilead Sciences.

The participation of centres from Switzerland was supported by The Swiss National Science Foundation (Grant 148522).

The study is also supported by a grant [grant number DNRF126] from the Danish National Research Foundation and by the International Cohort Consortium of Infectious Disease (RESPOND).

PARAGRAPH

The ATHENA cohort is managed by Stichting HIV Monitoring and supported by a grant from the Dutch Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport through the Centre for Infectious Disease Control of the National Institute for Public Health and the Environment.

PARAGRAPH

This work was performed within the framework of the SHCS, supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNF grant number 177499, SHCS project number 751), by the SHCS Research Foundation and the SHCS Association.

Further funding was obtained from the NEAT-ID Foundation.

GW was supported by a Professorship (PP00P3_176944) from the Swiss National Science Foundation.

The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish.

SECTION

Conflicts of interest

PARAGRAPH

The authors declare no conflicts of interest that pertain to this work.

PARAGRAPH

Please refer to the accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.

SECTION

Authors’ contributions

PARAGRAPH

GW and AR conceived and designed the study.

DK and AA performed the statistical analyses.

GW, EM and AR wrote the first draft of the manuscript.

All authors contributed to the acquisition and interpretation of the data, critically revised the paper and approved its final version.