10.1016/j.engappai.2019.02.012

ABSTRACT

TITLE

A minimax probability extreme machine framework and its application in pattern recognition

PARAGRAPH

In this work we propose a minimax probability extreme learning machine framework (MPME), which combines the benefits of minimax probability machine (MPM) with extreme learning machine (ELM).

For binary classification problems, we illustrate that the proposed MPME can be interpreted geometrically by minimizing the maximum of Mahalanobis distances to the two classes.

Then two variants of the MPME are presented based on the l2-norm loss and l1-norm loss functions (called LSEMPME and LADMPME) respectively.

Without making specific assumption on the data distribution, the proposed methods can provide explicit upper-bounds for the generalization error, moreover the LSEMPME and LADMPME minimize empirical risk simultaneously.

The decision hyperplanes of the proposed methods pass through the origin in ELM feature space with few decision variables.

By using the multivariate Chebyshev–Cantelli inequality, all the proposed problems can be reformulated as second-order cone programming (SOCP) with global solutions.

Furthermore, numerical experiments have been carried out on two databases that are drawn from UCI benchmark database and a practical application database.

First, the proposed methods are evaluated for a practical application consisting on the analysis of licorice seeds using near-infrared spectral (NIR) data.

Experiments in six different spectral regions illustrate that the proposed methods can improve generalization in most cases.

Then the proposed methods are evaluated on benchmark datasets.

In comparison with traditional methods including MPM, ELM and support vector machine (SVM), experiments show that the proposed methods achieve comparable results in generalization.

With few decision variables, the proposed methods are easy to implement for nonlinear classification and to estimate a lower-bound on the prediction accuracy.