10.1016/j.jhep.2019.12.008

ABSTRACT

TITLE

Clinical validation of the FLIP algorithm and the SAF score in patients with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease

PARAGRAPH

Histological classifications used to diagnose/stage nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) are based on morphology, thus empirical, with undetermined clinical correlates and relevance.

We assessed the clinical relevance of the fatty liver inhibition of progression (FLIP) algorithm and the steatosis, activity and fibrosis (SAF) scoring system.

PARAGRAPH

140 consecutive patients with suspected NAFLD and a separate validation cohort of 78 patients enrolled in a therapeutic trial, all with central reading of liver biopsy, were included.

FLIP and SAF defined patients with steatohepatitis (NASH), NAFL (non-NASH NAFLD) or non-NAFLD.

SAF activity score assessed hepatocyte ballooning and lobular inflammation; histologically severe disease was defined as a SAF activity score of >3 and/or bridging fibrosis or cirrhosis.

Clinical, biochemical and metabolic data were analyzed in relation to histology.

PARAGRAPH

Patients with NASH according to the FLIP algorithm had a distinct clinical profile from those labeled NAFL, with a higher prevalence of metabolic risk factors (increased BMI, central obesity, serum glucose and HbA1c), more severe insulin resistance (fasting insulin, HOMA-IR values) and higher level of aminotransferases.

Similar findings were documented for patients with severe disease vs. those without.

Positive linear trends existed between NASH or severe disease and increasing BMI and HOMA-IR.

There was a strong association between liver fibrosis and NASH or SAF-defined scores of activity.

Patients with either significant or bridging fibrosis overwhelmingly had NASH, and bridging fibrosis most often coexisted with severe activity.

PARAGRAPH

The FLIP algorithm/SAF score, although based on purely morphological grounds, are clinically relevant as they identify patients with distinct clinical and biological profiles of disease severity.

Disease activity in NAFLD is associated with fibrosis severity.

