10.1016/j.jhep.2018.07.017

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Dietary exacerbation of metabolic stress leads to accelerated hepatic carcinogenesis in glycogen storage disease type Ia

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common primary malignancies of the liver.1

Many studies have demonstrated a strong link between hepatic tumorigenesis and non-alcoholic fatty liver diseases (NAFLDs), including obesity, diabetes and other genetic metabolic liver diseases, such as glycogen storage disease type I (GSDI).2–4

NAFLD can go from simple steatosis characterized by hepatic fat accumulation, to the more aggressive form called non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), associated with inflammation and fibrosis.

While it is considered that NASH/NAFLD can lead to liver cirrhosis, predisposing the liver to HCC, studies have reported that HCC can also develop in the absence of cirrhosis.

Moreover, hepatocellular adenomas (HCA), which are rare benign tumors, can later transform into HCC in the absence of cirrhosis.5,6

PARAGRAPH

GSDI is due to a deficiency in glucose-6 phosphatase (G6Pase) activity.7,8

The mutations in G6PC, encoding the catalytic subunit of G6Pase,9,10 are responsible for GSD type Ia (GSDIa), while mutations in SLC37A4 encoding the transport subunit of the G6Pase, are responsible for GSD type Ib (GSDIb).

G6Pase is an enzyme expressed only in the liver, kidneys and intestine, converting glucose-6 phosphate (G6P) into glucose, ensuring normal glycemia.11,12

The deficiency of G6Pase results in hypoglycemia, associated with hypercholesterolemia, hypertriglyceridemia, lactic acidosis and hyperuricemia in patients with GSDI and animal models.7,8,13

Furthermore, increased accumulation and intracellular flow through G6P lead to glycogen and lipid accumulation in the hepatocytes, resulting in hepatomegaly and hepatic steatosis.7,8,13

As mentioned above, most adult GSDI patients develop HCA, which can transform into HCC, with approximately a 10% incidence of transformation, in the absence of liver fibrosis and cirrhosis.14,15

In a French cohort of patients with GSDI, about 50% of HCA were diagnosed as inflammatory, nearly 30% of HCA showed β-catenin mutations and 20% of HCA were unclassified.14

PARAGRAPH

While the molecular mechanisms involved in GSDI tumorigenesis remain unclear, there are several pathways suspected to be involved in this process.16

Since GSDI can be considered as a NAFLD-like condition, lipid-related risks could lead to tumorigenesis.

Glycogen and lipid storages in massive quantities can induce inflammation, apoptosis and even necrosis.17–19

Impaired metabolism can induce abnormal responses in hepatocytes, such as autophagy dysregulation and activation of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress pathways.

Indeed, recent studies showed a decrease in autophagic flux in GSDI livers.20,21

All these mechanisms could promote tumorigenesis in the case of GSDI.

PARAGRAPH

In order to investigate the pathways involved in tumorigenesis, our laboratory has developed a GSDIa mouse model, in which G6pc is deleted specifically in the liver.

These L.G6pc−/− mice exhibit the same hepatic and plasmatic complications observed in patients with GSDIa, including HCA and HCC development.13,22

PARAGRAPH

In this study, we analyzed cellular and metabolic stress in L.G6pc−/− livers at a pretumoral and at a tumoral stage that leads to the loss of tumor suppressors, such as PTEN and p53.

Indeed, G6Pase deficiency in the liver translates into a metabolic reprogramming in the hepatocytes, characterized as a ‘Warburg-like’ effect that alters many aspects of cell homeostasis, thus triggering tumorigenesis.

SECTION

Materials and methods

SECTION

Generation of liver-specific G6pc knock-out mice (L.G6pc−/−)

PARAGRAPH

L.G6pc−/− mice were obtained by tamoxifen treatment of B6.G6pclox/lox.SACreERT2 mice at the age of eight weeks as previously described.13

C57Bl6/J mice (Charles Rivers, L’Arbresle, France) were used as a control (referred to as WT mice).

After tamoxifen treatment, male and female L.G6pc−/− and control mice were fed a high fat/high sucrose (HF/HS) diet (35% fat, 20% proteins, 35% carbohydrates including starch and sucrose) during four months or nine months.

One group of L.G6pc−/− mice and WT mice was fed a standard (STD) chow diet (3.1% fat, 16.1% proteins, 60% carbohydrates; Safe) during nine months.

Animals were housed in groups of 4–6 mice, with “Lignocel” bedding (JRS, Rosenberg, Germany) in an enriched environment at 21 °C, with a light/darkness cycle 12 h/12 h and free access to water and food.

All the procedures were performed in accordance with the principles and guidelines established by the European Convention for the Protection of Laboratory Animals.

The regional animal care committee (C2EA-55, Université Lyon 1, Lyon) approved all the experiments.

SECTION

Histological and immunohistological analysis

PARAGRAPH

Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining of liver and tumors was done as previously described.13

Liver sections were stained using proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), p53 or LC3B antibodies (Supplementary CTAT Table), as described in the cell signaling technology immunohistochemistry protocol.

For transmission electron microscopy (TEM), ultra-thin sections were obtained and observed as previously described.23

Four to five tissue samples were prepared from each group of mice.

Ten liver or tumor sections (fields) from each mouse were documented and the number of autophagic vesicles per field was assessed.

In the present study, one field represents an area of 108 µm × 108 µm observed in TEM (4–5 adjacent hepatocytes/field; no empty space in the field).

For each sample, 10 fields were assessed and the number of autophagosomes per field was averaged in each group.

Immunohistological quantification of autophagic vesicles via LC3B labeling was done in the same way, with the only difference being the size of the field (330 × 250 µm), with a magnification of x400.

SECTION

Metabolic studies

PARAGRAPH

Blood was withdrawn by submandibular bleeding 6 h after food removal.

Plasmatic and hepatic metabolites were determined as previously described.13,23

Alpha- fetoprotein (AFP) (R&D Systems Inc, Lille, France) and C reactive protein (CRP) (Abcam, Cambridge, UK) levels were determined by ELISA.

Aspartate aminotransferase (AST)/alanine aminotransferase (ALT) activities were determined with colorimetric activity assays (Abcam, Cambridge, UK).

SECTION

Gene and protein expression analysis

PARAGRAPH

Antibodies for western blot analyses are cited in the Supplementary CTAT Table.

The visualization and quantification of the proteins were performed using the BioRad ChemiDoc™ Touch Imaging System (Marnes La Coquette, France).

PARAGRAPH

Total RNAs were isolated according to the Trizol protocol (Invitrogen Life Technologies, Thermofisher, France).

Quantitative reverse transcription PCR was performed as previously described, expressed in 2-DDCT value with WT normal liver as normalizator.13,23

The mouse ribosomal protein mL19 (Rpl19) was used as reference.

Primer sequences are indicated in Supplementary CTAT Table.

SECTION

DNA damage analysis

PARAGRAPH

DNA extraction was performed using a DNeasy Blood & Tissue Kit (Qiagen) and 8-OHdG quantification was further performed using an 8-OHdG DNA Damage ELISA kit (Cell Biolabs, Inc.).

SECTION

Statistics

PARAGRAPH

The results are reported as the mean ± SEM.

At the pretumoral stage, WT and L.G6pc−/− groups were compared with a Student’s t test.

At the tumoral stage, tissue samples were compared with one-way ANOVA.

Differences were considered to be statistically significant at p value <0.05.

PARAGRAPH

For further details regarding the materials used, please refer to the CTAT table.

SECTION

Results

SECTION

High fat/high sucrose diet accelerates hepatic carcinogenesis in L.G6pc−/− mice

PARAGRAPH

L.G6pc−/− mice develop hepatic steatosis and are prone to HCA development with time.13

As reported, on a standard diet, about 30–40% of L.G6pc−/− mice develop millimetric tumors after nine months of G6pc deletion and almost all mice show macroscopic nodules after 18 months.13

As previously mentioned, tumorigenesis is accelerated by HF/HS diet in L.G6pc−/− mice (Rajas et al.

JIMD, 2015).

Indeed, strikingly, 85% of L.G6pc−/− mice had hepatic lesions, millimetric lesions to larger lesions, after nine months on HF/HS diet (Fig. 1A; Table S1), while no tumors were observed in L.G6pc−/− livers after four months of HF/HS diet.

Among all HF/HS diet- fed L.G6pc−/− mice that underwent analysis, about 60% of them developed between one to five macroscopic nodules, ranging from 0.2 to 1.5 cm (Table S1).

Interestingly, about 70% were histologically diagnosed as HCA and 30% were diagnosed as HCC (Fig. 1B panels c and d, respectively).

As observed by histology, HCAs were mainly steatotic (Fig. 1B panel c).

In general, HCC cells were smaller than L.G6pc−/− hepatocytes, with a denser cytoplasm (Fig. 1B panel d).

It is noteworthy that none of the WT mice fed a HF/HS diet developed hepatic nodules.

Contrary to mice fed HF/HS diet, in this study only 18% of L.G6pc−/− mice fed a standard diet for nine months developed millimetric lesions and one developed a macroscopic nodule (identified as HCA), (Table S1).

As previously shown,24 L.G6pc−/− mice fed a HF/HS diet were resistant to obesity compared to WT mice, which became obese (Fig. S1).

PARAGRAPH

In order to distinguish between the effect of the HF/HS diet and the effect of G6pc deficiency on the metabolic and tumorigenic phenotype of the L.G6pc−/− mice, we compared the majority of the results obtained in L.G6pc−/− mice under a HF/HS diet at the tumoral stage (nine months) with L.G6pc−/− mice fed a standard chow diet for nine months.

Interestingly, hepatic triglycerides were lower in L.G6pc−/− mice fed a HF/HS diet compared to WT mice fed a HF/HS diet, while HF/HS diet exacerbated lipid accumulation in L.G6pc−/− mice compared to mice fed a standard diet (Fig. 1C).

In addition, HF/HS diet did not modify glycogen content in L.G6pc−/− livers, which was higher in L.G6pc−/− mice compared to WT mice (Fig. 1C).

Thus HF/HS diet exacerbated hepatic lipid accumulation and greatly increased the incidence of hepatic tumors and their transformation into HCC in L.G6pc−/− mice, but it did not induce tumorigenesis in WT mice.

PARAGRAPH

To further characterize tumorigenesis in L.G6pc−/− mice, we analyzed cellular and metabolic perturbations in the livers of L.G6pc−/− mice fed a HF/HS diet at a pretumoral stage (i.e. four months of HF/HS diet) and at a tumoral stage (i.e. nine months of HF/HS diet), compared to obese WT mice that did not develop HCA/HCC.

All plasmatic and hepatic parameters of L.G6pc−/− mice were similar at both pretumoral and tumoral stages, with the exception of hepatic triglycerides, which were further decreased at the tumoral stage compared to pretumoral L.G6pc−/− livers (Table 1).

In accordance with the phenotype of L.G6pc−/− mice, a significant increase in cholesterol, triglycerides and lactate was observed in L.G6pc−/− mice compared to WT mice, whereas plasmatic and hepatic glucose levels were decreased (Table 1).

Plasmatic uric acid and non-esterified fatty acids were unchanged.

Liver weight increased slightly at nine months, compared to the pretumoral stage, due to the weight of the tumors.

At the pretumoral and tumoral stages no differences in PCNA staining were observed between WT and L.G6pc−/− livers (Fig. 1D, panels a–d).

As expected, an increased number of PCNA-positive cells was observed in HCA and HCC samples (Fig. 1D panels e and f), indicating an increase in cell proliferation in GSDI tumors.

At the tumoral stage, circulating CRP levels were low and similar in WT and L.G6pc−/− mice fed an HF/HS diet (Fig. 1E), suggesting a low-grade inflammation in the liver due to steatosis.

In addition, liver damage in L.G6pc−/− mice fed a HF/HS diet was moderated and similar to that observed in WT mice.

However, HF/HS diet slightly increased plasma AST, but not ALT, levels in L.G6pc−/− mice compared to a standard diet (Fig. 1F).

Interestingly, the expression of malignancy markers of HCC was increased in L.G6pc−/− mice bearing tumors.25,26

Indeed, the plasma concentration of AFP was significantly increased in L.G6pc−/− mice bearing HCA/HCC (Fig. 1G).

Furthermore, glypican 3 (Gpc3) had a strong tendency to increase in HCC, but also in some low atypia histologically classified as HCA (Fig. 1H).

Gpc3 expression in some HCA samples could be due to a more advanced stage and a tendency to transform into HCC, implying early acquirement of malignant traits in HCA.

PARAGRAPH

These results show that L.G6pc−/− livers are characterized by low-grade hepatic inflammation and damage, similarly to that observed in WT mice fed a HF/HS diet.

While WT mice fed an HF/HS diet did not develop tumors after nine months, most L.G6pc−/− mice developed HCA or HCC, which were characterized by high proliferation and elevated markers of malignancy.

SECTION

G6pc−/− mice exhibit hepatic loss of tumor suppressors

PARAGRAPH

In order to analyze further potential actors involved in tumorigenesis, the expression of several tumor suppressors i.e. hepatic nuclear factor 1 α (HNF1α), phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) and p5327–29 was assessed in L.G6pc−/− livers and tumors.

At the pretumoral stage, the expression of Hnf1a mRNA was similar between L.G6pc−/− and WT mice (Fig. 2A).

Interestingly, Hnf1a mRNA was significantly decreased at the tumoral stage in L.G6pc−/− livers and tumors, compared to WT livers, as previously reported in human GSDI livers and tumors14,27 (Fig. 2B).

Pten expression was decreased in L.G6pc−/− livers at both pretumoral and tumoral stage and in tumors (Fig. 2A–B).

Interestingly, p53 acetylation at Lys379, which activates the accumulation of p53 as a stress response following DNA damage,30,31 was increased in L.G6pc−/− livers at the pretumoral stage (Fig. 2C).

On the contrary, acetylated p53 was decreased at the tumoral stage in L.G6pc−/− livers and in HCA/HCC (Fig. 2D), thus indicating a switch in p53 signaling between the stages.

Furthermore, phosphorylation of p53 at Ser392,32 which influences the growth suppressor function, DNA binding, and transcriptional activation of p53, was increased in L.G6pc−/− livers at both stages and in HCA/HCC.

Immunohistochemistry analysis revealed that p53 was translocated in the nuclei of WT and L.G6pc−/− hepatocytes, after four and nine months of HF/HS diet (Fig. 2F, panels a–d), while we observed the presence of p53-negative nuclei in HCA samples (Fig. 2F panel e).

In HCC samples, most nuclei were p53-negative, while p53 preferentially accumulated in the cytoplasm of hepatocytes (Fig. 2F panel f).

It is noteworthy that the expression of tumor suppressors was slightly decreased in L.G6pc−/− fed an HF/HS diet compared to L.G6pc−/− mice fed a standard diet for nine months (Fig. 2B and E).

PARAGRAPH

These results suggest that the loss of tumor suppressors is an early event that occurs in the L.G6pc−/− liver at a pretumoral stage.

Later on, at the tumoral stage, the expression of tumor suppressors is strongly altered.

SECTION

Lack of EMT is responsible for the absence of liver fibrosis in L.G6pc−/− livers

PARAGRAPH

In the general population, hepatic fibrosis or cirrhosis generally precede the development of HCC.

As already observed in patients with GSDI,8 L.G6pc−/− livers did not show signs of fibrosis (Fig. 1), yet HCC occurred.

In order to investigate the lack of fibrosis in L.G6pc−/− livers, epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), which is known to lead to hepatic fibrosis,32 was analyzed.

At the tumoral stage, the epithelial marker E-cadherin was upregulated in L.G6pc−/− livers compared to WT, while none of the mesenchymal markers, i.e. vimentin (Vim), α-smooth muscle actin (Acta) and plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (Pai1), were increased (Fig. 3A–B).

Furthermore, transforming growth factor beta 1 (Tgfb1), which can activate EMT in the liver,33 was unchanged, confirming the absence of EMT and fibrosis induction (Fig. 3B).

Surprisingly, E-cadherin remained increased in hepatic tumors (Fig. 3A).

In addition, an increase in the epithelial marker β-catenin was observed only in HCC, as already observed in patients with GSDI14 (Fig. 3A).

Concomitantly, the mesenchymal markers were all increased in hepatic tumors (tendency for Pai1), more substantially in HCC than in HCA (Fig. 3B).

However, Tgfb1 expression was decreased in HCA and HCC (Fig. 3B).

These results indicate a concomitant upregulation of epithelial and mesenchymal markers in HCA/HCC which was mediated in a TGF-β1 independent manner.

PARAGRAPH

Finally, we analyzed the expression of the β-catenin target genes, i.e. glutamine synthetase (Glul) and leucine-rich repeat-containing G-protein coupled receptor 5 (Lgr5).

Even though β-catenin was overexpressed in HCC, the expressions of Glul and Lgr5 were decreased in L.G6pc−/− livers, and further decreased in HCA and HCC (Fig. 3C), indicating that the β-catenin pathway was not activated during tumorigenesis.

SECTION

Metabolic reprogramming of L.G6pc−/− livers favors tumorigenesis

PARAGRAPH

Hyperactivation of the glycolysis pathway has already been confirmed in GSDI livers.34

Interestingly, mRNA expressions of the glucokinase (Gck) and the glucose transporter Glut1 (Slc2a1), usually increased in glycolytic conditions, were dramatically decreased in L.G6pc−/− livers at both stages, as well as in HCA and HCC (Fig. 4A–B), probably to limit G6P accumulation.

Interestingly, HF/HS diet further downregulated the expression of Gck expression in L.G6pc−/− livers, compared to standard diet (Fig. 4B).

Concomitantly, a significant increase in plasmatic lactate concentrations was observed at both stages (Table 1), confirming increased glycolysis.

However, lactate dehydrogenase A (LDHA), which catalyzes the conversion of pyruvate to lactate, was unchanged in the liver of L.G6pc−/− mice fed a standard or a HF/HS diet (Fig. 4C–E).

Interestingly, the expression of the M2 isoform of pyruvate kinase (PK-M2), which is an alternatively spliced variant expressed in cancer cells,35 was significantly increased in L.G6pc−/− mice in tumors compared with non-tumoral liver, suggesting a key modification of metabolism deriving from tumorigenesis (Fig. 4D).

In accordance with the acceleration of tumorigenesis in L.G6pc−/− mice fed an HF/HS diet, the hepatic PK-M2 expression was also higher in L.G6pc−/− mice fed an HF/HS diet compared to mice fed a standard diet (Fig. 4E).

Thus, the high expression of PK-M2 confers a strong glycolytic profile on HCA and HCC.

PARAGRAPH

OXPHOS analyses revealed a decrease in mitochondrial respiration in L.G6pc−/− livers compared to WT livers fed an HF/HS diet at pretumoral and tumoral stage, characterized by a decrease in pyruvate oxidation (Fig. S2).

The global respiration values were low, consistent with the hepatic steatosis observed in both L.G6pc−/− and WT mice, due to the HF/HS diet.36

Pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH), a key factor in pyruvate oxidation, was similar in WT and L.G6pc−/− livers and tumors (Fig. 4C–D).

In addition, pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4 (PDK4), an inhibitor of PDH, was downregulated in L.G6pc−/− livers at both stages.

Interestingly, the mitochondrial pyruvate carrier 1 (MPC1) was slightly decreased in L.G6pc−/− livers at the pretumoral stage compared to WT liver (Fig. 4C).

A further decrease was observed at the tumoral stage, and even more in HCA and HCC (Fig. 4D).

This decrease was independent of the diet, since HF/HS did not deeply modify the expression of MPC1 in L.G6pc−/− livers (Fig. 4E).

Thus a further decrease in pyruvate transport in the mitochondria could explain, at least in part, the decreased pyruvate oxidation in L.G6pc−/− livers.

PARAGRAPH

Analysis of the main actors in lipid metabolism revealed an increase in de novo hepatic lipogenesis in L.G6pc−/− mice fed an HF/HS diet compared to obese WT mice, concomitantly with a decrease in fatty acid oxidation (FAO) at four and nine months (Fig. 5A and C).

This was already observed in L.G6pc−/− mice fed a standard diet.13,24

Additionally, HF/HS diet increased further de novo lipogenesis gene expression in L.G6pc−/− livers compared to a standard diet, without impacting on FAO (Fig. 5B), explaining the increase in hepatic TG content with HF/HS diet (Fig. 1C).

The increase of lipogenesis in L.G6pc−/− mice compared to WT mice was linked to an increase in carbohydrate-responsive element binding protein (Chrebp), especially Chrebp β–isoform mRNA expression (Fig. 5A and C).

On the contrary, the expression of sterol regulatory element binding protein 1 (Srebp1) and Srebp2 was slightly decreased in L.G6pc−/− livers, compared with WT livers (Fig. 5A and C).

At the tumoral stage, a similar increase in lipogenesis gene expression was observed in L.G6pc−/− livers compared to WT mice, while this increase was less pronounced in HCA and HCC (Fig. 5C).

Concomitantly, the expression of genes involved in FAO was more decreased in tumors than in L.G6pc−/− livers.

Interestingly, total Chrebp expression decreased in L.G6pc−/− livers and tumors at this stage (Fig. 5C), contrarily to the pretumoral stage.

Nevertheless, Chrebp-β isoform expression remained increased in L.G6pc−/− livers and tumors.

During malignant transformation, increased formation of small lipid droplets is often detected and perilipin is an important factor in this process.37

Interestingly, perilipin was detected only in HCC samples (Fig. 5D).

PARAGRAPH

These results show a complete metabolic reprogramming in L.G6pc−/− livers, characterized by an increase of glycolysis, a reduction in pyruvate oxidation, an increase in hepatic lipid synthesis and a decrease in FAO at the pretumoral and tumoral stage.

In addition, HF/HS diet strongly increased glycolysis and de novo lipogenesis, without affecting FAO in L.G6pc−/− mice.

Finally, in tumors, FAO was considerably decreased, concomitantly with a decrease in lipogenesis.

SECTION

Impairment in cellular defenses in L.G6pc−/− livers

PARAGRAPH

Altered metabolism and steatosis can lead to an increased production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and cause oxidative stress.

In order to maintain homeostasis, hepatocytes activate antioxidant enzyme production against ROS-induced damage.

However, the expression of catalase (Cat) and glutathione peroxidase (Gpx1) was decreased at the pretumoral and the tumoral stages compared to WT mice fed an HF/HS diet (Fig. 6A–B).

Moreover, the decrease of catalase was exacerbated by HF/HS diet in L.G6pc−/− mice compared to standard diet (Fig. 6B).

These results indicate a possible cellular stress in L.G6pc−/− livers and tumors that was confirmed by the presence of donut-shaped mitochondria in L.G6pc−/− livers and in HCA/HCC (Fig. 6C).

However, this was not associated with an increase in oxidative DNA damage.

Indeed, 8-OHdG levels were similar in WT and L.G6pc−/− livers and tumors after nine months on HF/HS diet (Fig. 6D).

In order to analyze the importance of antioxidant loss in L.G6pc−/− livers, mice were treated with tempol, an antioxidant agonist for nine months.

Although we observed a significant increase in Cat and Gpx1 expression in L.G6pc−/− mice treated with tempol (Fig. S3), 9 out of 12 treated L.G6pc−/− mice developed hepatic tumors with the same characteristics as non-treated L.G6pc−/− mice, proving that an increase in antioxidant defenses is not capable of impeding HCA/HCC development.

PARAGRAPH

As recently reported,20,21 a decreased autophagic flux was observed in L.G6pc−/− mice fed a standard diet for nine months (Fig. S4A).

A decrease in autophagy was confirmed in L.G6pc−/− livers under an HF/HS diet compared to WT livers at pretumoral and tumoral stages by a decrease in ATG3 and LC3B-II/LC3B-I ratio, concomitantly with an accumulation of p62 (Fig. 6E).

This is concordant with the decrease in the number of autophagosomes in L.G6pc−/− livers at both pretumoral and tumoral stages (Fig. 6F–G).

Moreover, the loss of autophagy was slightly exacerbated by HF/HS diet, specifically in L.G6pc−/− mice (Fig. 6E).

To make sure that G6pc deficiency and not HF/HS diet is responsible for autophagy decrease, LC3B assessment was done in WT mice fed a standard or HF/HS diet.

However, HF/HS diet did not modify the level of autophagy in WT mice (Fig. S4A).

More interestingly, p62 was decreased in HCA and HCC samples compared to L.G6pc−/− livers.

Indeed, autophagy seemed to be increased in tumors as shown by an increase of the number of autophagosomes in tumors vs. L.G6pc−/− livers (Fig. 6F–G).

Furthermore, the mTOR/AKT pathway, a negative regulator of autophagy, was downregulated at the tumoral stage in L.G6pc−/− livers and HCC, but surprisingly not in HCA (Fig. S4B–C).

In accordance with a previously described key role of Sirtuin 1 (SIRT1) signaling in the decrease of autophagy in GSDIa livers,21 the hepatic expression of SIRT1 was decreased in L.G6pc−/− mice compared to WT mice on an HF/HS diet.

In addition, SIRT1 was similarly expressed in L.G6pc−/− mice fed a standard diet or an HF/HS diet (Fig. 6H).

Interestingly, SIRT1 had a tendency to be more highly expressed in HCC, but not in HCA samples, which was in accordance with a reactivation of autophagy in tumors (Fig. 6H).

PARAGRAPH

Thus, these results show that altered metabolism and steatosis in GSDIa lead to cellular stress and mitochondrial damage.

Molecular studies suggest a decrease in autophagy in L.G6pc−/− livers during tumorigenesis, due to a decrease in SIRT1 signaling, but independently of mTOR pathway.

Interestingly, autophagy seems to be reactivated in HCA/HCC, which could be potentially favorable for tumor progression.

SECTION

Endoplasmic reticulum stress – another contributor to tumorigenesis in GSDI livers?

PARAGRAPH

Disrupted cellular homeostasis can lead to ER stress and thus to malignancy38 and/or altered lipid metabolism.39

Interestingly, a marked decrease in BiP protein expression (chaperone protein that attenuates hepatic steatosis40) was observed in L.G6pc−/− livers at the pretumoral and the tumoral stage, and furthermore in HCA/HCC (Fig. 7A).

This was independent of HF/HS diet, since the hepatic expression of BiP was similar in L.G6pc−/− mice on a standard or a HF/HS diet (Fig. 7B).

BiP downregulation can lead to the activation of the three main axes of ER stress (IRE1α/XBP1, PERK/ATF4 and ATF6).

IRE1α was increased in L.G6pc−/− livers at both stages and in HCA/HCC, while the active form of its target XBP1-S was decreased at the pretumoral stage and increased at the tumoral stage (Fig. 7A–B).

Concomitantly, ATF6 was slightly increased in pretumoral and tumoral L.G6pc−/− livers, and varied in tumors (Fig. 7A–B).

Surprisingly, the analysis of PERK/ATF4 pathway revealed an inhibition of this pathway in L.G6pc−/− livers, especially in HCA/HCC, since the phosphorylation of eIF2α (target of PERK) was decreased (Fig. 7A–B).

Interestingly, chronic ER stress was exacerbated with HF/HS diet in the liver of L.G6pc−/− mice, compared to standard-fed L.G6pc−/− mice (Fig. 7B).

Finally, a decrease in the transcription factor C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP) and cleaved caspase 3 was observed in L.G6pc−/− livers at the pretumoral stage, indicating a decrease in ER stress-activated apoptosis (Fig. 7A).

Contrarily to the pretumoral stage, CHOP was increased in L.G6pc−/− livers at the tumoral stage, with a concomitant increase in cleaved caspase 3, indicating an increase in ER stress-activated apoptosis (Fig. 7B).

As expected, a strong inhibition of caspase 3 and cleaved PARP was observed in HCA/HCC (Fig. 7B), confirming the blockade of apoptosis in tumors.

PARAGRAPH

In conclusion, chronic ER stress activation was observed in L.G6pc−/− livers.

It was mainly mediated via the IRE1/XBP1 and ATF6 pathways, but not through PERK/ATF4.

Surprisingly, at the pretumoral stage, this activation led to decreased apoptosis, whereas at the tumoral level, apoptosis levels were restored.

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

In GSDIa, the loss of G6Pase activity is characterized by G6P accumulation in hepatocytes, leading to metabolic reprogramming that promotes tumorigenesis.14,16

In this work, we have drawn up a complete picture of the metabolic disturbances exacerbated by a HF/HS diet that lead to the loss of cellular defense mechanisms and trigger tumorigenesis in a mouse model of GSDIa.

We showed that GSDIa hepatocytes exhibited the main characteristics of cancer cell metabolism, i.e. a preferentially high rate of glycolysis, rather than mitochondrial pyruvate oxidation, leading to an increase in lactate production.

In addition, the accumulation of hepatic lipids was increased by a concomitant increase in de novo lipogenesis and a decrease in FAO.

This offers advantages to proliferating cells, since increased fatty acids provide substrates for cellular membrane biogenesis needed for cell division.

Altogether, these metabolic perturbations were associated with the loss of several cellular defenses, i.e. autophagy, antioxidant enzymes, dysregulation of ER stress responses and apoptosis.

In addition, L.G6pc−/− livers did not exhibit EMT and were characterized by a low-grade inflammatory response and the absence of fibrosis, despite the high incidence of hepatic tumors.

PARAGRAPH

L.G6pc−/− mice represent a unique viable model of GSDIa that reproduces all hepatic hallmarks of GSDIa pathology.

Indeed, almost all L.G6pc−/− mice fed a standard diet developed tumors with time, which were mainly histologically classified as HCA as previously shown.13

In accordance, we estimated a 5–10% incidence of transformation to HCC after 18 months of G6pc deletion (unpublished data).

Similar findings were observed in another GSDIa mouse model, in which liver-specific G6pc deficiency was initiated in utero, reporting 25% of mice developing HCA between 10 and 20 months.41

Interestingly, tumor initiation and malignant transformation into HCC were highly accelerated in L.G6pc−/− mice fed an HF/HS diet, since nearly all mice developed large hepatic nodules after nine months, with 30% of tumors diagnosed as HCC.

HF/HS diet probably accelerates further the hepatic metabolism by providing more substrates for glycolysis and lipid synthesis.

Since WT mice fed a HF/HS diet did not develop hepatic tumors after nine months, the metabolic reprogramming induced by the G6Pase loss seems to provide a more hospitable environment for hepatic tumorigenesis.

PARAGRAPH

Since GSDI shares common metabolic dysregulations with NASH/NAFLD, many of the complications that lead to HCC in this set of metabolic diseases could be accountable for HCC development in GSDI.16

NAFLD-associated complications include inflammation, necrosis, lipotoxicity, adipokine imbalance and liver injury and remodeling.

In spite of hepatic tumor development, we showed that these metabolic dysregulations did not lead to liver injury in GSDI.

Thus ASL/ALT and CRP were slightly above healthy control values,42 but were similar in L.G6pc−/− mice bearing or not bearing tumors.

Thus, as in obesity, GSDIa is characterized by a low-grade chronic inflammatory response that is associated with increased tumor development.

Contrarily to the majority of HCC, which arise in fibrotic/cirrhotic livers, HCC in L.G6pc−/− livers develop in non-fibrotic conditions.

This lack of fibrosis could be explained, at least in part, by the absence of inflammation and low levels of the profibrotic factor TGF-β1.43

It is noteworthy that unlike HCC in the general population, HCC in GSDI are developed from HCA transformation, while de novo formation of HCC has never been reported.14

Furthermore, while EMT is known to occur during the progression of HCC33 to facilitate tumor dissemination, we observed a paradoxical concomitant upregulation of epithelial and mesenchymal markers in HCA/HCC, in the absence of TGF-β1 increase.

E-cadherin and vimentin co-expression was already observed in breast cancer, and associated with poor prognosis.44

While the co-expression of epithelial and mesenchymal markers might indicate only an intermediate stage of EMT or a reverse mesenchymal to epithelial transition in these tumors,45 this can still favor metastasis formation, which has already been reported in patients with GSDI.46

Therefore, it is important to pinpoint the exact role of EMT in GSDI tumorigenesis.

Lastly, increased inflammation and EMT have been reported to occur in GSDI kidneys and contrarily to the liver, here this process leads to renal fibrosis and cyst development.23

Thus, the difference in inflammation status in the liver and the kidneys in GSDI leads to different outcomes in these organs, and warrants further study.

PARAGRAPH

In L.G6pc−/− mice, HCA and HCC were characterized by a downregulation of tumor suppressors such as HNF1α, p53 and PTEN.

The loss of tumor suppressors was also observed in L.G6pc−/− livers, conferring important neoplastic characteristics on the non-transformed GSDI hepatocytes.

Furthermore, p53 was recently characterized as an important factor in lipid metabolism, independently of its role as a tumor suppressor.47

Thus, its deregulation could imply additional lipid metabolism alterations.

In addition, AMPK and SIRT1, also qualified as tumor suppressors, were already found to be downregulated in GSDI livers.21,24

The downregulation of SIRT1 was confirmed in our study.

Interestingly, the development of HCA to HCC was linked to a significant increase in plasma AFP and the overexpression of β-catenin and glypican 3.

Unfortunately, previous studies already highlighted that AFP is not a reliable marker of HCC in patients with GSDI.

Moreover, AFP overexpression seems to be linked to a specific type of HCC associated with P53 mutations, whereas β-catenin-mutated HCC exhibited low levels of serum AFP.48

The presence of glypican 3 in some HCA samples, as well as the increase of AFP in mice that bore HCA accentuated the strong malignant transformation potential of HCA to HCC in GSDI.

PARAGRAPH

Unlike in cancer cells, glucose phosphorylation is significantly decreased in L.G6pc−/− hepatocytes and HCA/HCC, limiting the accumulation of G6P.

However, as observed in cancer cells, L.G6pc−/− hepatocytes preferentially metabolize glucose into lactate, conferring a “Warburg-like” phenotype to GSDIa hepatocytes.

Interestingly, the PK-M2 isoform was overexpressed only in HCA/HCC.

As many strategies are being developed to target this protein in order to block tumorigenesis,49 it is important to confirm this result in human patients, to consider PK-M2 inhibition as an anti-tumoral strategy for GSDIa.

“Warburg-like” metabolism could also be promoted by the impairment of mitochondrial pyruvate transport, illustrated by a decrease of MPC1 expression and mitochondrial damages in L.G6pc−/− livers and tumors.

This deficient pyruvate transport may concur to lactic acidosis observed in patients with GSDIa, as observed in patients with MPC1 deficiency.50

A decreased import of pyruvate into the mitochondria is in accordance with the observed downregulation of mitochondrial OXPHOS activity in L.G6pc−/− livers.

Interestingly, Farah et al.20 also reported the absence of increased reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels in KO-G6pc cells, despite decreased mitochondrial respiration.

This is in accordance with the previously mentioned unchanged 8-OHdG levels in L.G6pc−/− livers and tumors.

Thus, oxidative stress and increased ROS production do not seem to be present in L.G6pc−/− livers.

This could explain in part why autophagy is inhibited in L.G6pc−/− livers, since increased ROS levels are a known activator of autophagy.

Interestingly, FAO was strongly decreased as well, especially in tumoral samples.

Indeed, the liver-specific deletion of G6pc results in suppressed expression of PPARα, a master regulator of FAO.

However, lipid oxidation is generally increased in cancer cells.51

In conclusion, increased glycolysis along with the downregulation of mitochondrial respiration represents a marked reprogramming of hepatic metabolism favoring tumor development in GSDIa livers.

PARAGRAPH

As previously mentioned, these metabolic perturbations lead to the impairment of cellular defenses, i.e. autophagy, ER stress and antioxidant defenses in L.G6pc−/− livers.

First, we confirmed the suppression of autophagy previously reported in L.G6pc−/− livers.20,21

As previously shown,21 the downregulation of autophagy in GSDI seems to be mediated by decreased SIRT1 expression, independently of the canonical autophagy regulator mTOR.

Herein, we show that the AKT/mTOR pathway is downregulated in L.G6pc−/− livers and therefore does not seem to block autophagy.

In accordance with mitochondrial damages, SIRT1 expression was decreased in L.G6pc−/− mice compared to obese WT mice.

Thus, the inhibition of autophagy in the livers could contribute to further accumulation of glycogen, lipids, non-functional organelles and metabolites, leading to DNA damage and tumor formation.

Nevertheless, in HCA/HCC, we observed a reactivation of autophagy, which could be favorable for tumor progression, since it provides building blocks and substrates for tumor proliferation and biomass gain.

This could be explained by a modification of AKT/mTOR and SIRT1 signaling in tumors.

Secondly, we showed a specific ER stress response, induced by a significant decrease in BiP, accentuated in HCA/HCC.

Variations in ER stress responses led to a decrease in apoptosis at the pretumoral and an increase in apoptosis at the tumoral stage.

Oxidative stress and autophagy can also induce apoptosis in cases where the cell cannot adapt to the overbearing cell damage.52

Increased apoptosis rates in hepatocytes have been reported in both patients with GSDIa and animal models, yet the actual cause of apoptosis induction is still to be deciphered.34

Autophagy and ER stress responses are finely tuned mechanisms that can interact at many levels and the result of these interactions conditions cell fate.

Failure to activate these responses probably leads to tumorigenesis.

PARAGRAPH

In conclusion, the various metabolic alterations in L.G6pc−/− livers, along with the decrease in several tumor suppressors, as well as cell defense deregulations, predispose GSDI livers to HCA/HCC development.

Therefore, G6Pase deficiency in the liver initiates a complex metabolic reprogramming that affects many aspects of cell homeostasis, thus favoring proliferation and tumorigenesis.

Importantly, lipid and glucose metabolisms are deeply modified in tumors compared to L.G6pc−/− livers, in association with possible reactivation of autophagy, accentuated ER stress, and decreased apoptosis.

Herein, the precise description of the various mechanistic changes initiated by G6pc deficiency offers as many possible targets and rationales to envision future interventions aimed at moderating the severity (or treating) the disease.

SECTION

Financial support

PARAGRAPH

This work was supported by research grants from the Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR11-BSV1-009-01), the Association Francophone des Glycogénoses (AFG) and the Ligue régionale contre le cancer.

M.G. is a recipient of the “Ligue nationale contre le cancer” funding.

L.M. is a recipient of “La Fondation pour la Recherche Médicale” funding (ECO20160736048).

JZR team is « équipe Labellisée par la Ligue Nationale Contre le Cancer », LNCC, and funded by INSERM with the « Cancer et Environnement » (plan Cancer) and HETCOLI projects (Tumor Heterogeneity and Ecosystem program).

The group is supported by the “Ligue Nationale contre le Cancer” (Equipe Labellisée), Labex OncoImmunology (investissement d’avenir), “Coup d’Elan de la Fondation Bettencourt-Shueller”, the SIRIC CARPEM and “Fondation Mérieux”.

SECTION

Conflict of interest

PARAGRAPH

The authors declare no conflicts of interest that pertain to this work.

PARAGRAPH

Please refer to the accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.

SECTION

Authors’ contributions

PARAGRAPH

M.G. designed, conducted experiments, analyzed the data and wrote the paper.

J.C. designed, conducted experiments and analyzed the data.

M.S. and M.R. were in charge of mouse breeding and animal experiments.

L.M., C.R. and D.R conducted experiments.

J.C. and M.B. are anatomopathologists and classified hepatic tumors.

J.C., L.M., D.R., J.Z-R., and G.M. critically edited the manuscript.

F.R. supervised the studies and wrote the paper.