10.1016/j.jhep.2019.10.026

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Metabolic pathway analyses identify proline biosynthesis pathway as a promoter of liver tumorigenesis

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

With an estimated 700,000 new cases per year, hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the fifth commonest cancer and third leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide.

Currently, HCC cases occur predominantly in East and Southeast Asia, and sub-Saharan Africa due to hepatitis B/C viral infection.

However, the incidence of HCC is rising in Western nations, largely associated with metabolic complications, such as non-alcoholic steatohepatitis related to obesity and type II diabetes.

The overall 5-year survival rate remains below 12% due to limited treatment options.1

So far, 4 oral multikinase inhibitors (sorafenib, regorafenib, lenvatinib and cabozantinib) and 2 immunotherapeutic agents (nivolumab and pembrolizumab) have been FDA-approved for the treatment of HCC.2–7

However, due to treatment eligibility criteria, side effects and modest clinical benefit, it remains a top priority to identify additional effective therapeutic targets.

PARAGRAPH

To meet the increased energetic and anabolic needs of sustained cell proliferation, cancer cells undergo dramatic metabolic reprogramming.8

The expression changes observed in cancer cells can frequently be linked to the activity of multiple classic oncogenes and tumor suppressors.

Overall, accumulating evidence demonstrates that changes in metabolism confer a potent influence on tumor development and growth, and dysregulated cellular energetics are now a recognized hallmark of cancer.9,10

More importantly, these metabolic changes also hold the potential for therapeutic intervention.

A notable advance has been the targeting of changes in amino acid metabolism, including metabolism of serine, glycine, and branched-chain amino acids for certain cancers.11–14

PARAGRAPH

In this report, by comparing the metabolic enzyme expression profiles of different HCC animal models with those from liver tissues of normal and regenerating liver models, we identify a central role of proline biosynthesis in HCC tumorigenesis.

We demonstrate that pyrroline-5-carboxylate reductase 1 (PYCR1), the enzyme catalyzing the final step in proline production, has a functional role in regulating cell proliferation and tumor growth.

Importantly, PYCR1 expression levels correlated with HCC development and progression, and were associated with patient survival.

We also identify ALDH18A1 as an additional target in the proline biosynthetic pathway that positively regulates cell proliferation.

Together, our data suggest that the proline biosynthesis pathway may be a specific and effective target in the treatment of HCC.

SECTION

Materials and methods

SECTION

Lentivirus-mediated shRNA knockdown and overexpression studies

PARAGRAPH

Short hairpin oligonucleotides targeting rat and human PYCRs were subcloned into lentiviral vectors pLKO or pLKO-Tet via AgeI and EcoRI sites to generate respective lentiviral knockdown (KD) constructs.15,16

The following oligonucleotides were used for vector construction: rat Pycr1, 1.1) GCT GCC ATA AAG AAG ACT GTA; 1.2) GAA CCT GAC ACC CCA CAA CAA; 1.3) GGC AGC CAA GAT GCT ACT AGA; human PYCR1, 1.1) CAC AGT TTC TGC TCT CAG GAA; 1.2) CCC TTC ATC CTG GAT GAA ATA; 1.3) GAG GGT CTT CAC CCA CTC CTA; human PYCR2, 2.1) GCC CTT AAG AAG ACC CTC TTA; 2.2) TTC ATG GCT CTG GAC GCA TTG; 2.3) GCC CTG CAC TTT CTA GAG A; human ALDH18A1, 1.1) GCC TTC AGT CAT CAG ACA TGT; 1.2) GGA GCA ACA TCC CGT TTA TCA; 1.3) GGT ATC AGT GCT GCA GAA TCA; 1.4) GGC AGA ACC AGC TGA AAG AAA.

For HepG2, SNU-398 and HaCat cells the following sequences were used for human PYCR1 shRNA, i) GAG GGT CTT CAC CCA CTC CTA; ii) CTG CTC ATC AAC GCT GTG GA; iii) TGA GAA GAA GCT GTC AGC GTT.

Human and rat cDNAs for PYCR1, PYCR2, PRODH, ALDH18A1 were cloned into lentiviral expression vectors.17

All DNA constructs were verified by sequencing.

PARAGRAPH

Lentiviral particles were produced by co-transfection of HEK293T cells with lentiviral constructs and third generation packaging plasmids using the calcium phosphate transfection method.

The supernatant containing the viral particles was collected 72 h after transfection, centrifuged at 1,000 g for 5 min and filtered with 0.45 μm filter.

Lentiviruses were stored at −80°C.

SECTION

Animal studies and animal models

PARAGRAPH

All animal experimental protocols were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of the A*STAR (Agency for Science, Technology and Research) in Singapore, and carried out according to the guidelines for the care and use of laboratory animals and Biological Resource Center IACUC guidelines for cancer research in mice and rats.

Animals were housed in individually ventilated cage system (TECNIPLAST) in specific-pathogen-free room on 12 h light/12 h dark cycles.

Male mice and rats were used in all animal experiments and had ad libitum access to sterilized water and food (Altromin, 1324 mod.

18% Protein, 6% Fat).

PARAGRAPH

Orthotopic rat model with MH3924a cell line: this HCC model was created by direct intrahepatic injection of rat MH3924a cells into 8-week-old ACI/SeqHsd rats (n = 20).

Rats were anesthetized and a midline incision was made to expose the liver.

Cells (1x106), mixed 1:1 with Matrigel™ (Corning Life Science), were slowly injected under the hepatic capsule into the upper left lobe of the liver using a 27-gauge needle in 100 μl.

Gentle compression was applied with a cotton applicator to stop bleeding and reflux of the cells.

The abdomen was closed with a 4-0 silk suture.

PARAGRAPH

Xenograft HCC model with MH3924a cells: 8-week-old male CB-17 SCID mice (n = 20) were subcutaneously injected with MH3924a cells (1x106), which were mixed 1:1 with Matrigel® (Corning Life Science) in 100 μl.

Tumor growth was monitored 3x per week.

PARAGRAPH

Orthotopic HCC model with Huh7 cells: this HCC model was created by direct intrahepatic injection of Huh7 cells into 4–5-week-old male Balb/c nude mice (n = 20).

Mice were anesthetized and a midline incision was made to expose the liver.

Huh7 cells (1x106), mixed 1:1 with Matrigel (Corning Life Science) in 50 μl, were slowly injected into the left lobe of the liver using a 28-gauge needle.

The cells were injected at a 30-degree angle into the liver, so that a transparent bleb of cells could be seen through the liver capsule.

After injection, a small piece of sterile gauze was placed on the injection site, and light pressure was applied for 1 min to prevent bleeding.

The abdomen was then closed with a 5-0 silk suture.

PARAGRAPH

Diethylnitrosamine (DEN) mouse HCC model: 2-week-old male C57BL6/N mice (n = 20) were injected i.p. with 50 mg/kg body weight of DEN.

Mice were sacrificed 8 months later to collect liver tumors and other tissues.

PARAGRAPH

DEN rat HCC model: ACI/SeqHsd rats (n = 10) of about 8 weeks old were supplied with 100 mg/L DEN in drinking water, while the control rats were given normal water.

Both DEN drinking water and normal water were supplied ad libitum.

Rats were sacrificed 12 weeks later to collect tumor samples.

PARAGRAPH

Generation of liver regeneration model by 2/3 partial hepatectomy: hepatectomy surgery was based on the method published by Mitchell and Willenbring.18

Eight-week-old male C57BL/6N mice (n = 10) or ACI/SeqHsd rats (n = 10) were deeply anesthetized with ketamine/xylazine via i.p. injection, laparotomy was performed to expose the liver, 4-0 silk threads were placed on the base of left and median lobes, sutures were tied, then curved scissors were used to cut the tied left and median lobe.

Liver regeneration was monitored at different time points, and after 16 days, the liver almost recovered to its original size.

In order to harvest tissues with the highest percentage of proliferating cells, we collected liver tissues between 36 and 48 h after hepatectomy, and analyzed gene expression changes.

SECTION

PCR array analysis

PARAGRAPH

Mouse and rat amino acid metabolism I/II PCR arrays of 96-well plate format (cat.

No. PAMM-129Z, 130Z; cat.

No. PARN-129Z, 130Z) were purchased from Qiagen.

Total RNA from DEN-induced mouse liver tumors, orthotopic rat MH3924a tumors, regenerating liver tissue, and non-tumor liver tissues were extracted using RNeasy mini kit (Qiagen).

1.2 μg of total RNA was used for first strand synthesis with RT2 First Strand Kit (Qiagen), then the first strand reaction was mixed with RT2 SYBR green Master mix and evenly distributed into 96-well plates containing the pre-dispensed gene-specific primer sets.

Quantitative real-time PCR was performed according to RT2 Profiler PCR Array Handbook using an ABI StepOnePlus™ instrument.

The PCR conditions were as follows: 95°C for 10 min for initial enzyme activation and 40 cycles of amplification at 95°C for 15 s and 60°C for 1 min.

Ct values were exported for web-based data analysis at http://pcrdataanalysis.sabiosciences.com/pcr/arrayanalysis.php.

SECTION

Transcriptomic and metabolomic analyses

PARAGRAPH

Animal liver tissues (n = 4 for each group) for the analyses of transcriptomic and metabolomic studies were collected according to established protocols.

RNA libraries were prepared using TruSeq® Stranded total RNA kit (Illumina), and deep (next-generation) sequencing was performed by a sequencing service platform (Genome Institute of Singapore, A*STAR).

Transcriptomic dataset was filtered for genes with count >1 in at least 1 sample.

Counts per million (cpm) were calculated based on total number of reads in each sample, and then log2 transformed for further analysis.

Pathway analysis was performed with significantly up- or downregulated genes (p value ≤0.05, fold-change ≥1.5 or ≤-1.5) comparing PYCR1 KD or PYCR2 KD to non-targeting control Hep3B samples (n = 4 for each group) using pathway-based over-representation gene set analysis on ConsensusPathDB Release 33 with default settings.19

Heatmap of log2 fold-changes (Fig. 3B) of each sample over the average of the 3 Hep3B controls was plotted using heatmap.2 in R (R Core Team) without scaling, and clustered by Kendall tau rank distance in the rows (genes) and Euclidean distance in the columns (samples).

PARAGRAPH

Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA 3.0,20,21) was performed using all genes with p value ≤0.05 when comparing either PYCR1 KD or PYCR2 KD to non-targeting Hep3B control samples.

Genes were ranked according to log2 fold-changes, and pre-ranked GSEA was performed using default parameters with the hallmark, c2 and c5 gene set databases (v6.2).

Detailed enrichment results can be found in Table S1.

PARAGRAPH

Metabolomic analysis of PYCR1 KD in MH3924a, Hep3B and Huh7 cells was performed by Metabolon Inc. 275 compounds of known identity were compared between non-targeting control (n = 4) and PYCR1 KD cells (n = 4).

SECTION

Glycolytic function test

PARAGRAPH

Non-targeting control and shRNA PYCR1-infected Hep3B and Huh7 cells (20,000) were seeded overnight in XF24-well plates and glycolysis stress tests were carried out using Seahorse XF24 Flux Analyzer according to the manufacturer's instructions (Seahorse Bioscience Inc.).

Extracellular acidification rate was measured under basal conditions and after injection of 10 mM glucose, 1 μM oligomycin, and 50 mM 2-deoxyglucose.

Glycolysis test parameters were calculated with the Seahorse XF Glycolysis Stress Test Report Generator.

SECTION

HCC patient studies

PARAGRAPH

Human samples (n = 55) were obtained in the context of clinically indicated surgery and with written informed consent from patients, in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and using protocols approved by the SingHealth Institutional Review Board at the National Cancer Centre Singapore.

PARAGRAPH

Paraffin-embedded sections (5 μm) were deparaffinized and rehydrated for immunohistochemical analysis.

Slides were incubated overnight with anti-PYCR1 antibody (Proteintech, 13108-1-AP), followed by incubation with secondary biotinylated polyclonal antibodies (Dako) for 1 h at room temperature.

Subsequently, sections were stained with streptavidin-biotin-peroxidase complex system (Dako) according to manufacturer's instructions.

Peroxidase activity was detected with 3,3′-diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride substrate.

All sections were counterstained with hematoxylin and eosin.

Histoscore (H-score) was calculated by a semi-quantitative assessment of both the intensity of staining (graded as: non-staining 0; weak 1; median 2; or strong 3) and the percentage of positive cells.

Possible scores range from 0 to 300.

The Wilcoxon (paired) signed rank test was used to analyze the H-score differences between tumor and non-tumor samples.

PARAGRAPH

Gene expression from snap frozen samples was analyzed using the HumanHT-12 v3 gene expression microarray (Illumina) and probe intensity values were normalized using the GenomeStudio software.22

PARAGRAPH

For further details regarding the materials used, please refer to the CTAT table and supplementary information.

SECTION

Results

SECTION

Proline metabolism was altered in HCC models but not in regenerating liver tissues

PARAGRAPH

By performing transcriptomic analyses on DEN and MH3924a tumors, we recently reported that liver tumors displayed changes in a vast array of metabolic pathways.14

Importantly, these changes were not observed in regenerating tissues, suggesting that they were not simply associated with generic proliferation, but rather, have some degree of specificity to oncogenesis.

To identify potential therapeutic targets, we ranked genes within the top KEGG pathways by their fold-change in expression (Fig. 1A).

Phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (PHGDH) and phosphoserine aminotransferase 1 (PSAT1) were identified as the most upregulated genes in HCC models, consistent with previous reports that serine and glycine metabolism played an important role in carcinogenesis,11,12 and suggesting that they may have a similar role in HCC.

Although shRNA KD of Phgdh or Psat1 in rat MH3924a cells led to a reduction in cell proliferation, depletion of PHGDH or PSAT1 had no effect on proliferation of the human HCC cells lines Hep3B and Huh7 (Fig. S1A,B).

Moreover, analysis of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)-liver hepatocellular carcinoma (LIHC) cohort demonstrated that expression of PHGDH and PSAT1 actually decreases in tumors and is not a very good predictor of clinical outcomes (Fig. S1C).

Thus, while PSAT1 or PHGDH may warrant further investigation, we concluded that they may not be the best targets for therapeutic intervention and decided to examine other genes on the list for their potential role in influencing hepatocarcinogenesis.

PARAGRAPH

The next 2 highest-ranked genes were proline dehydrogenase 1 (Prodh), which catalyzes the degradation of proline, and Pycr1, which promotes the synthesis of proline (Fig. 1A,B).

Prodh was reduced by ~4-fold and Pycr1 increased by 3- to 4-fold in the HCC models, consistent with an overall increase in proline biosynthesis (Fig. 1A).

Changes in expression were confirmed by quantitative reverse transcription PCR (qRT-PCR) for the transcripts and by western blot for proteins (Fig. 1C,D).

While control liver tissues had barely detectable levels of Pycr1 mRNA or protein, we observed a significant increase in Pycr1 mRNA expression (~15-fold in mouse and 25- to 30-fold in rat tumors) in all tumor tissues tested, and a corresponding increase in PYCR1 protein levels in all mouse and rat tumors.

Conversely, tumors displayed an overt loss of Prodh mRNA and protein relative to non-tumor liver tissue (Fig. 1C,D).

To determine whether the expression changes influenced enzyme activities and metabolite levels, we measured proline concentrations in samples from the different tumor models.

Both rat DEN and Morris Hepatoma tumor samples showed significantly higher proline levels than their controls (Fig. 1E).

Consistently, the proline content in mouse DEN tumor samples also showed an upward trend compared with its control (Fig. 1E).

Taken together, these data show that enzymes involved in proline metabolism, namely Pycr1 and Prodh, are altered in tumors to promote proline biosynthesis.

SECTION

PYCR1 KD limits HCC cell proliferation in vitro and tumor growth in vivo

PARAGRAPH

To further investigate proline metabolism in HCC tumorigenesis, we first focused on the upregulated gene PYCR1.

In line with animal tumor models, high level expression of PYCR1 was observed in numerous human HCC cell lines, including Huh7, Hep3B, HepG2, SNU-398, and SNU-449, while expression was low in normal liver tissue and a non-tumorigenic immortalized HaCat cell line (Fig. 2A).

Next, we assessed the functional role of PYCR1 by shRNA-mediated gene KD studies, using 3 sequences targeting PYCR1 and a non-targeting control construct.

Multiple HCC cell lines were infected with lentiviral constructs carrying the shRNA and control sequences,15 and KD efficiency was assessed by western blots (Fig. 2B).

Depletion of PYCR1 significantly decreased cell proliferation in all HCC cell lines tested (Fig. 2C and Fig. S2A).

In contrast, KD of PYCR1 did not affect the proliferation of non-tumorigenic HaCaT cells (Fig. S2A).

Next, we performed xenograft experiments by injecting Pycr1 KD or control MH3924a cells subcutaneously into SCID mice (Fig. 2D), as well as orthotopically into the livers of ACI rats (Fig. 2E).

Consistent with in vitro studies, depletion of PYCR1 led to significantly smaller tumors compared with control cells in both xenograft models (Fig. 2D,E).

For validation, we also generated a doxycycline (Dox)-inducible PYCR1 KD cell line.

Western blots confirmed the efficacy of the Dox-induced KD, and consistent with constitutive shRNAs, the Dox-induced PYCR1 KD cells displayed a reduction in cell proliferation (Fig. 2F).

To ensure that the effects on cell proliferation were specific to PYCR1 depletion, we also reintroduced PYCR1 expression in Dox-induced Hep3B KD, as well as the constitutive Huh7 KD cells.

As anticipated, re-expression of PYCR1 rescued proliferation in both KD cells (Fig. 2G).

A decrease in cell number after KD could be due to an increase in apoptosis, but we found no evidence of this based on cleaved caspase-3 levels (Fig. S2B,C).

Considering PYCR1 KD resulted in decreased proliferation of several HCC cell lines, we examined whether overexpressing PYCR1 (above baseline levels) was sufficient to enhance proliferation.

Indeed, overexpression of PYCR1 in Hep3B and Huh7 cells resulted in significantly higher proliferation rates (Fig. S3A,B).

In contrast, PYCR1 overexpression had no significant effect on proliferation in immortalized, non-tumorigenic liver cells from mouse (AML12) and human (THLE2) cell lines, or the HaCat cell line (Fig. S3C,D).

Taken together, these data demonstrate that PYCR1 is necessary for the proliferation of tumorigenic cell lines in vitro and in vivo, without affecting the proliferation or viability of normal and non-tumorigenic cells.

This suggests that PYCR1 may be a potential therapeutic target for certain cancers.

SECTION

PYCR1, but not PYCR2, regulates HCC cell proliferation

PARAGRAPH

There are 3 PYCR isoenzymes (PYCR1, 2, and 3) that are all quite broadly expressed across tissues at low to moderate levels.

In normal liver tissues, all 3 isoenzymes can be detected, with PYCR2 having the highest baseline expression.

We analyzed the mRNA expression of these 3 isoenzymes by qRT-PCR in the animal tumor models and found that both Pycr1 and Pycr2, but not Pycr3, were upregulated in tumors (Fig. 1A,C and Fig. S4A).

Since PYCR1 and PYCR2 have high amino acid sequence similarity (84%) and both are localized to the mitochondria, we investigated whether PYCR2 also plays a role in proline biosynthesis and proliferation in the HCC cell lines.

Inducible PYCR2 KD led to an approximately 20–30% reduction in cell proliferation despite good KD efficacy (Fig. S4B).

It is worth noting that in these PYCR2 KD cells, PYCR1 was also reduced (by ~55% for shRNA2.1 and 20% for shRNA2.2), which might account for the decreased cell proliferation.

Furthermore, overexpression of PYCR2 in PYCR1 KD cells failed to rescue the cell proliferation defect (Fig. S4C).

Thus, these findings suggest that despite similar localization and sequence homology, PYCR1 and PYCR2 have divergent functions, and human PYCR2 may not be involved in the regulation of HCC cell proliferation.

PARAGRAPH

To further examine the functions of PYCR1 and PYCR2, we generated PYCR1-, PYCR2- and PYCR1/2 double KD cells, and performed RNA-sequencing analysis (Fig. 3, Fig. S5).

We observed that a large number of genes were significantly altered (p ≤0.05, fold-change ≥1.5) in PYCR1 KD cells but not in PYCR2 KD cells (Fig. S5B).

A majority of these genes were downregulated (1,719 in PYCR1 KD, 167 in PYCR2 KD), while a much smaller fraction were upregulated (466 in PYCR1 KD, 110 in PYCR2 KD).

Pathway analyses on up- and downregulated genes showed that cell cycle pathway genes were significantly over-represented among downregulated genes in PYCR1- but not PYCR2 KD cells (Fig. 3A,B), supporting our observation that KD of PYCR1, but not PYCR2, limits cell proliferation.

GSEA of all significantly altered genes (p ≤0.05) also showed that PYCR1 KD correlates with more cell cycle-related gene sets, such as E2F_targets, Myc_targets and G2M_checkpoint (Fig. S5C-E, Table S1).

Indeed, comparing the expression changes of the KD cell lines demonstrated a strong repression of crucial cell cycle regulators, such as cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs), as well as the transcription factors E2Fs and MYC, in PYCR1 but not PYCR2 KDs (Fig. 3B).

A majority of the histone cluster genes (45 out of 65) were also significantly downregulated in PYCR1 KD, but not PYCR2 KD cells.

Conversely, PYCR1 KD led to increased expression of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors (CDKNs), which are cell cycle repressors.

Together, the divergent gene signatures indicate that PYCR1, but not PYCR2, is crucial for HCC proliferation and PYCR1 presents a viable therapeutic target for HCC.

SECTION

Regulation of HCC cell proliferation by additional proline biosynthetic enzymes

PARAGRAPH

Next, we investigated whether modulation of additional enzymes in the proline metabolic pathway could also regulate cell proliferation.

Given the potent loss of PRODH expression in tumors, we overexpressed PRODH in multiple HCC cell lines (MH3924a, Huh7, and Hep3B), but observed no appreciable change in cell proliferation (Fig. S6).

Although the changes in gene expression of other enzymes in the proline metabolic pathway were not as dramatic as PYCR1 or PRODH in tumors, they were consistent with an increased glutamate-to-proline biosynthetic flux.

Notably, ALDH18A1, the enzyme that initiates this conversion, was upregulated in tumors, while multiple other enzymes involved in the conversion of intermediate metabolites to ornithine, and eventually arginine, were suppressed (Fig. 1B).

Similar to PYCR1, ALDH18A1 was barely detectable in normal or non-tumor liver tissues, but highly expressed in tumors (Fig. 4A).

Moreover, also similar to PYCR1, KD of ALDH18A1 led to suppression of cell proliferation in human HCC cell lines (Fig. 4B,C), and reintroduction of ALDH18A1 reversed the defective proliferation phenotype caused by ALDH18A1 depletion (Fig. 4D).

Overall, these data suggest that the biosynthesis of proline from glutamate is critical for cell proliferation.

SECTION

PYCR1 KD leads to an altered metabolic program favoring reduced proliferation

PARAGRAPH

Given the likely metabolic consequences of disrupting proline metabolism, and that this may be integral to PYCR1-mediated regulation of cell proliferation, we performed a non-targeted comprehensive metabolomic screen on control and PYCR1 KD cells in 3 independent cell lines, Hep3B, Huh7, and MH3924a.

Out of 275 detected metabolites, 13 (3 up, 10 down) were significantly different (p <0.10) in KD cells across all 3 cell lines (Fig. 5A).

Notably, these included a decrease in multiple lysophospholipids, along with the carbohydrates ribitol and sorbitol (Fig. S7).

To better understand the metabolic changes at the pathway level, we considered metabolites that were significantly different in at least 2 cell lines while not significantly different in the opposite direction in the third cell line (Fig. S7).

This expanded list of 79 metabolites identified numerous additional carbohydrates and nucleotide precursors that were broadly lower in KD cells (Fig. 5B, Fig. S7).

Glucose has multiple fates in both resting and proliferating cells, including fluxes into the polyol, hexosamine biosynthesis, glycolysis, and pentose phosphate pathways (Fig. 5C).

In particular, pentose metabolism is critical to supply precursors of nucleotide synthesis, while numerous cancer cells use aerobic glycolysis to generate energy and biomass for the production of new cells.

PYCR1 KD not only displayed lower levels of nucleotides and nucleotide precursors, but also a decrease in lactate, suggesting a limited flux through these pathways.

To further interrogate these findings, we examined the glycolytic activity in control and PYCR1 KD cells by using a Seahorse XF24 analyzer.

In agreement with the metabolomic data, KD of PYCR1 resulted in a significant decrease in the baseline levels of glycolysis, as well as a lower total glycolytic capacity in both Hep3B and Huh7 cells (Fig. 5D, Fig. S8A).

While there is no conversion of proline or its immediate metabolites to those in glycolysis or pentose metabolism, NAD+ and NADP+ are required for numerous reactions within these pathways.

Notably, the reactions catalyzed by PYCR1 and ALDH18A1 generate NADP+, and disruption of the glutamate-to-proline biosynthetic flux may disturb NADP+ production and NADP+/NADPH balance.

Indeed, PYCR1 KD markedly decreased levels of both NADP+ and NADPH, albeit the ratios of NADP+/NADPH were not changed (Fig. 5E,F, Fig. S8B,C).

Supplementation of NADP+ could partially rescue the reduction in cell proliferation of PYCR1 KD cells (Fig. 5G, Fig. S8D).

These data suggest that proline biosynthetic enzymes influence the glycolytic and pentose phosphate pathways, potentially through the generation of NADP+.

These pathways are critical for nucleotide biosynthesis and acetyl-CoA production, which fuels the TCA cycle and fatty acid biosynthesis.

Taken together, these data suggest that KD of PYCR1 results in a metabolic state that limits cell proliferation.

SECTION

Proline metabolism is altered in human HCC and associated with patient prognosis

PARAGRAPH

Finally, to characterize the proline biosynthetic pathway in primary human liver cancers, we examined the gene expression profiles of 55 matched HCC and adjacent normal liver tissue samples obtained from a Singapore-based cohort.

Consistent with the animal models and cell line studies, enzymes involved in proline biosynthesis via glutamate (PYCR1, ALDH18A1) were upregulated while catabolic enzyme PRODH and other enzymes via arginine pathway were downregulated (Fig. 6A).

Nearly identical expression patterns were observed in the TCGA (https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/ccg/research/structural-genomics/tcga) HCC cohort, confirming that these changes are robust and consistent across cohorts from divergent backgrounds.

With an independent group of paraffin-embedded HCC/adjacent normal tissues (n = 16), we also examined protein expression by performing immunohistochemistry for PYCR1.

Consistent with mRNA expression, high protein levels were readily detected in tumor tissues, but not in adjacent normal tissue (Fig. 6B), and histological scores (H-score) were significantly different between non-tumor and tumor samples (Fig. 6C).

Again, these changes were confirmed in another independent group of HCC samples characterized by The Human Protein Atlas.23–26

Immunohistochemical analysis confirmed that changes of the proline metabolic enzymes observed at the mRNA levels were also observed at the protein level (Fig. S9A,B).

Interestingly, we noted that the degree of change in mRNA expression correlated with tumor grades for many of the proline metabolic enzymes, most notably PYCR1, PRODH, and ALDH18A1 (Fig. 6D, Fig. S9C).

This suggests that the proline metabolic pathway is particularly altered in poorly-differentiated, aggressive tumors.

PARAGRAPH

To examine whether changes in tumor proline metabolism had any influence on clinical outcome, we analyzed the TCGA cohort for correlations in overall survival.

Patients that maintained high levels of expression of PRODH, or low levels of expression of ALDH18A1 or PYCR1 had significantly better survival rates (Fig. 6E).

Many of these associations remained significant even after adjusting for patient and tumor characteristics such as age, sex, tumor stage, tumor grade, radiation therapy, prescription therapy, and additional therapies (Fig. S9D).

These results add to the evidence that changes in proline metabolic enzymes confer functional advantages to tumors, and suggest that expression levels may serve as independent indicators of disease severity and predictors of clinical outcome.

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

Metabolic changes in cancer cells, particularly glucose and glutamine, have been extensively investigated, providing significant insights into both the metabolic stresses and requirements of proliferating cells.

The reprogramming of metabolic pathways has shed light on the complexity of cancer metabolism, yet raised the question as to whether these changes are indeed specific to cancer cells or a generic aspect of proliferation.

In this study, we carried out a unique approach to characterize the expression of metabolic enzymes in not only multiple tumor models, but also regenerating tissues.

This analysis provided evidence that serine/glycine metabolism, a pathway previously detailed in other cancers, is altered in liver carcinogenesis.

However, questions remain whether these changes confer functional advantages to proliferating cancer cells.

We also identified that the proline biosynthetic pathway is upregulated in HCC and demonstrated that it supports cell proliferation and tumor growth.

This is in line with published reports indicating that PYCR1 promoted tumor cell growth in breast and prostate cancer cells.27,28

PARAGRAPH

An effective increase of proline biosynthesis was achieved by tumors through upregulation of PYCR1 and ALDH18A1 expression with concomitant reduction of PRODH, an observation consistent across the different HCC tumor models as well as HCC patient tumor samples.

Along with increases in biosynthetic enzymes, proline metabolite levels were increased in the 3 different HCC animal models analyzed.

Notably, proline levels correlated with the tumor growth rates in the 3 different HCC models: the highest proline levels were found in the rapidly growing orthotopic Morris Hepatoma model while the lowest proline levels were detected in the slow-growing DEN model.

PARAGRAPH

The importance of proline metabolism in proliferating cells in vitro was observed more than 30 years ago.29

Subsequent mechanistic studies largely focused on PRODH and its importance in reactive oxygen species (ROS)-related signaling.

PRODH is a multifunctional protein since it can act as both tumor suppressor and tumor survival factor under different tumor conditions.30,31

Here, we found diminished level of PRODH in tumor samples and examined the potential therapeutic role of increasing PRODH in slowing down tumor cell proliferation.

Somewhat unexpectedly, overexpression of PRODH in 3 different HCC cells did not affect their proliferation (Fig. S6), which argues against targeting PRODH in liver cancer.

More recent studies have linked PYCR1 and ALDH18A1 activity to other metabolic pathways critical for cellular proliferation via their dependence on NAD(P)H balance.32–35

Our metabolomic data corroborate this model, demonstrating that fluxes through glycolytic and pentose phosphate pathways are disrupted after PYCR1 KD.

In addition to antioxidant properties associated with PRODH-mediated proline catabolism,36–38 it should be noted that proline itself was shown to have ROS scavenging activity, which protects cells from excessive ROS-induced damage.39

We cannot rule out the possibility that increased proline biosynthesis could be used to protect tumor cells from ROS-induced cell death, even though we observed no change in proliferation upon PRODH re-expression, and KD of PYCR1 in the HCC cell lines did not lead to detectable changes in ROS levels (Fig. S10).

Moreover, supplementing PYCR1 KD cells with excess proline in the cell culture media failed to rescue the suppression of proliferation (Fig. S11).

Therefore, although these processes may occur in proliferating cells, they do not appear to be the mechanism driving changes in proliferation.

Metabolite changes after PYCR1 KD indicated that cellular NADP+/NADPH levels might be important for HCC cell growth (Fig. 5E-G, Fig. S8B-D).34

Further studies are needed to conclusively define the underlying mechanisms.

PARAGRAPH

Both glucose and glutamine are critical nutrients taken up at high rates by proliferating cells.10,40,41

PYCR1 KD leads to major reductions in cellular glucose and intermediate glycolytic metabolite levels, along with other metabolic building blocks needed to sustain cell proliferation.

Besides feeding the TCA cycle with alpha-ketoglutarate, glutamate can also enter the proline biosynthetic pathway through enzymatic reactions mediated by ALDH18A1 and PYCR1.

Of note, proline can also be synthesized from ornithine.33,41

However, since metabolic enzymes mediating the ornithine to proline flux were downregulated (Fig. 1B), it is unlikely that the majority of proline in HCC is derived from ornithine.

What is the ultimate fate of the synthesized proline?

A recent report profiling the ribosomes of kidney tumors suggests that among all amino acids incorporated into proteins, proline availability is a limiting factor.42

However, this profiling has not been performed on liver tumors, and the fact that proline supplementation did not rescue the suppression of proliferation suggests this mechanism may not be a dominant factor in liver cancers.

An alternative fate could be incorporation into collagen, as proline (along with hydroxyproline) are major components.

Accordingly, desmoplasia is frequently observed in numerous cancers, including liver cancer,43 and provides benefits to growing tumors by modulating multiple aspects of the tumor microenvironment.

This would be analogous to the uptake of glucose coupled with the excretion of lactate, which has the secondary effect of acidifying the local tumor microenvironment.

PARAGRAPH

In summary, we demonstrate that the proline biosynthetic pathway is upregulated in animal tumor models, HCC cell lines, and human HCC samples.

Modulating expression of enzymes involved in proline metabolism influenced the proliferation of HCC cell lines in vitro and tumor formation in vivo.

It is worth noting that non-tumor liver tissues, normal proliferating cells or regenerating liver tissues expressed PYCR1 and ALDH18A1 at low or undetectable levels (Fig. S9A,B).44

Thus, PYCR1 and ALDH18A1 may be evaluated as potential cancer drug targets, and warrant further examination in human tumor samples, and functional studies in additional tumor models.

SECTION

Abbreviations

PARAGRAPH

ALDH, alcohol dehydrogenase; DEN, diethylnitrosamine; GSEA, gene set enrichment analysis; HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma; KD, knockdown; LIHC, liver hepatocellular carcinoma; NC, non-targeting control; PRODH, proline dehydrogenase 1; PYCR, pyrroline-5-carboxylate reductase; qRT-PCR, quantitative reverse transcription PCR; ROS, reactive oxygen species; shRNA, short hairpin RNA; TCGA, The Cancer Genome Atlas; WT, wild-type.

SECTION

Financial support

PARAGRAPH

This study was funded by A*STAR Biomedical Research Council and Bayer AG.

HCT and WH were supported by National Medical Research Council: NMRC/MOHIAFCAT2/001/2014, NMRC/OFLCG/003/2018, and the Biomedical Research Council (BMRC): BMRC/IAF311020/2016.

SECTION

Conflict of interest

PARAGRAPH

A.H., M.S. and S.G. are employees of Bayer AG.

The other authors declare no conflicts of interest that pertain to this work.

Please refer to the accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.

SECTION

Authors' contributions

PARAGRAPH

W.H. conceived and supervised the project, Z.D., R.E.E., Q.Y.L., M.S., A.H., P.C., H.C.T., B.R., S.G. and W.H. designed the experiments, Z.D., R.E.E., N.E.-B., Q.Y.L., A.L., M.S., S.D., and T.S.W.H. performed the experiments, Z.D., R.E.E., Q.Y.L., and W.H. wrote the manuscript with input and editing from all the authors.