10.1016/j.jhep.2019.09.018

ABSTRACT

TITLE

Change in hepatic fat content measured by MRI does not predict treatment-induced histological improvement of steatohepatitis

PARAGRAPH

Proof-of-concept studies frequently assess changes in intrahepatic triglyceride (IHTG) content by magnetic resonance-based techniques as a surrogate marker of histology.

The aim of this study was to establish how reliable this strategy is to predict changes in liver histology in patients with non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH).

PARAGRAPH

Patients with NASH who had participated in our prior randomized controlled trials of pioglitazone with complete paired data for IHTG content by magnetic resonance spectroscopy and liver histology were included in the study.

PARAGRAPH

A total of 121 patients were included.

Changes in IHTG were assessed in several ways: as a continuous variable (correlations), as categorical groups (IHTG change ≥0%; or IHTG reduction of 1–30%; 31–50%; 51–70%; or >70%), and in a binomial way as steatosis resolution or not (defined as achieving IHTG <5.56%).

Changes in IHTG correlated with steatosis on histology (r = 0.54; p <0.01).

However, the magnitude of IHTG reduction was not associated with the rate of response of the primary histological outcome (2-point improvement in the NAFLD activity score from 2 different parameters, without worsening of fibrosis) or resolution of NASH without worsening of fibrosis, neither in patients receiving pioglitazone nor placebo.

Changes in lobular inflammation, hepatocyte ballooning, or liver fibrosis were also independent of changes in IHTG, irrespective of treatment arm.

Steatosis resolution was not associated with better histological outcomes either.

PARAGRAPH

Changes in IHTG predict changes in steatosis but not of other liver histological parameters.

This implies that IHTG response to treatment should be interpreted with caution, as it may not be as reliable as previously believed to predict a treatment’s overall clinical efficacy in patients with NASH.

