10.1016/j.jhep.2019.11.004

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Educate, Test and Treat Model towards elimination of hepatitis C infection in Egypt: Feasibility and effectiveness in 73 villages

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Chronic hepatitis C infection is a major public health problem with an estimated 71 million people chronically infected with hepatitis C worldwide [1].

The global response has been transformed by the availability of low-cost, curative, short course direct acting antiviral (DAA) therapy.

The World Health Organization (WHO) has a stated goal to eliminate viral hepatitis C (and B) virus infection as a public health threat by 2030 – defined as a reduction in mortality by 65% and new infections by 90% [1,2].

Achievement of these impact targets is feasible through a combination of substantial scale-up of access to affordable testing and treatment with the highly effective new direct-acting antiviral drug regimens alongside HCV preventative interventions such as harm reduction in key populations and reduction in unnecessary and unsafe injection practices [3].

While there has been some encouraging progress in global treatment scale-up with more than 3 million treated with direct acting antivirals since 2015, access to and uptake of testing remains poor, and less than 10% of those with chronic HCV infection in low-resource settings (LRS) have been diagnosed [1].

PARAGRAPH

Egypt has a very high prevalence and burden of chronic HCV infection (predominantly genotype 4) in the general population (7% HCV RNA positive in 2015) [2] largely as a result of poor injection safety practices during mass population anti-schistosomal eradication campaigns from the 1950s [4] together with other ongoing unsafe medical practices [2,5].

The national government and Ministry of Health and Population (MOHP) established an early effective viral hepatitis response, with the goal of elimination of hepatitis C infection from Egypt.

This response has included the development of a comprehensive action plan for the prevention, care and treatment of viral hepatitis [6], negotiation of low prices for originator and generic direct acting antivirals (DAAs), and establishment of the largest treatment programme worldwide (with treatment of more than 1.8 million Egyptians through a network of more than 73 treatment sites).

As a result, there has been a decline in the estimated prevalence of chronic viraemic infection from 10% in 2008 [7] to 7% in 2015 [2].

However, it is estimated that there are still between 3.5 to 4.2 million persons currently living with chronic hepatitis C infection in Egypt and in need of treatment [8,9].

Rural communities account for 57% of Egypt’s 92 million population, and a substantial proportion of those with chronic HCV infection live in one of the 6635 villages across the 27 governorates.

Therefore, to achieve the goal of elimination of hepatitis C infection in Egypt, the strategy of elimination needs to be increasingly directed towards case finding through mass screening in rural communities to identify and treat those not yet aware of their diagnosis [10].

A further issue has been the continued high rate of new infections, estimated at 2-6 cases per 1000 (equivalent to at least 170,000 new cases) per year [9] due unsafe injection and health care practices [10], highlighting the need for concomitant effective awareness raising and education campaigns to prevent new infections [11].

PARAGRAPH

We developed a community-based outreach model (educate, test and treat) for the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of hepatitis C infection as an important strategy for elimination of hepatitis C across villages in rural Egypt, but applicable to other high burden countries.

We recently described this model and its successful implementation in one village in northern Egypt (Al-Othmanya, Gharbiah governorate) [12].

The programme achieved high uptake of HCV testing, prompt and high levels of linkage to care and DAA treatment, and attainment of cure in 97% of those treated.

The programme demonstrated the important role of community volunteers in achieving high level of testing uptake and linkage to care, improving community awareness and education leading to significant behavior changes, as well as the ability to fund-raise to cover the financial costs of HCV care.

Re-testing of those HCV antibody negative during the original screening programme three years previously, has confirmed a very low incidence new infections (incidence rate of 0.18/1000py (95% CI=0.03-0.6) confirming near elimination of HCV infection from this village [13].

PARAGRAPH

We now report implementation and scale-up of this educate, test-and-treat model during 2016 to 2018 in 73 villages across 7 of the 27 governorates in Egypt.

Our primary objective was to demonstrate feasibility and effectiveness at scale on key outcomes (uptake of serological HCV and HBV testing, and linkage to assessment and HCV viral load, uptake of treatment, cure, and incidence of new infections).

A further objective was to derive lessons learnt to inform further expanded implementation to other villages in Egypt and internationally as a model for elimination of hepatitis C infection in rural communities

SECTION

METHODS

SECTION

Project Implementation:

PARAGRAPH

Between June 6, 2015 and June 9, 2016, a community-based educate, test-and-treat demonstration project was established by the Egyptian Liver Research Institute and Hospital (ELRIAH) to eliminate HCV from adults (aged 12-80 years) living in Al-Othmanya in Gharbiah governorate.

A full description of this model and results has been described recently [12].

Key features of the programme consisted of community mobilisation facilitated by recruitment and training of a network of village promoters to implement an educational and testing campaign; fundraising for public donations in the local community to provide free care and treatment for low-income persons in need; comprehensive free testing, linkage to care and treatment for all eligible villagers (i.e., those aged 12–80 years who had not previously been treated for HCV), adopting a proactive household testing approach to ensure that all potentially affected people were diagnosed and linked to treatment with direct-acting antivirals; and an educational campaign with dissemination of educational messages about safer practices to reduce transmission, through public events, house-to-house visits, and use of promotional materials (e.g., booklets, cartoons, songs) to raise awareness and promote behavioural changes to reduce transmission at community facilities and in the home.

PARAGRAPH

This educate, test-and-treat model, with some modification during implementation, was scaled-up by ELRIAH between 6/2016 and 06/2018 in 73 villages across 7 of the 27 governorates in Egypt (Gharbiah, Dakahlia, Damietta, Port-Said, Beni-Swef, Sohag and Red Sea) (Figure 1).

ELRIAH is a liver and gastrointestinal diseases hospital, research institute, clinical laboratory and clinical trials centre established in 2011 by the Association of Liver Patients Care (ALPC) - a non-governmental organization.

The hospital is located in Sherbin near Mansoura, Dakahlia, Egypt.

ELRIAH has also established 20 satellite facilities located throughout Egypt that were used in this expanded programme (Figure 1).

We used diffusion of innovations theory and an implementation research and framework to inform implementation and evaluation of the model across the 73 villages [14,15].

PARAGRAPH

Testing and assessment protocol: Eligible villagers aged 12 to 80 years were identified from 2015 village census data and tested at designated community sites using HCV antibody and hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) serological rapid diagnostic tests, with results in 15 minutes.

This was followed with immediate collection of venous blood samples in those HCV antibody or HBsAg RDT positive for HCV-RNA or HBV DNA viral load confirmation at ELRIAH or one of its satellite sites.

The majority of patients waited for their RDT result, and those positive had an immediate sample collected for HCV RNA.

The remainder returned for their RDT result over the next few days, as the visiting team was present every day during the two to three week testing drive in the village.

All HCV PCR RNA positive patients as well as all HBsAg positive patients with HBV DNA >2000 IU/ml had an initial clinic visit at ELRIAH or one of its 20 satellite sites.

That included: physical examination, BMI, 12-lead ECG; a blood sample for hematology, chemistry, HbA1c, and AFP.

Staging of liver disease and fibrosis stage was determined using transient elastography or in the case of invalid measures FIB4 scores.

All patients also had abdominal ultrasonography to screen for hepatocellular carcinoma, with access to multislice spiral CT scan (MSCT) as required (Figure 2).

PARAGRAPH

Diagnostic assays: HCV antibody and HBsAg test screening was performed using a rapid immune-chromatographic assay (InTec Products, Haicang, China), and a rapid one-step assay (InTec Products, Haicang, China), respectively.

An independent evaluation of the diagnostic performance of these assays was undertaken in comparison with lab-based EIA (Stat Fax 2100, Awareness Technology, Palm City, Florida, USA) and CLIA (Architect plus Ci 4100, Abbott Diagnostics, Abbott Park, Illinois, USA) in 200 HBsAg and 200 HCV antibody positive and 200 HBsAg and 200 HCV antibody negative samples.

For HCV RDT, sensitivity was 100% (95% CI: 98.1%-100%) and specificity was 98% (95% CI: 95.1%-99.5%).

For HBV RDT, sensitivity was 100% (95% CI: 98.2%-100%) and specificity was 98% (95% CI: 98.2%-99.5%).

HCV Antibody reactive cases were confirmed using a real-time HCV-RNA PCR (Cobas Ampliprep, Cobas Taqman 48, Roche, Basel, Switzerland) at ELRIAH.

HBV DNA PCR was done using HBV-DNA PCR (Cobas Ampliprep, Cobas Taqman 48, Roche, Basel, Switzerland) at ELRIAH.

Additional baseline blood tests performed were full blood count (automated blood cell analyzer Sysmex XT-1800i (Sysmex Corporation, Kobe, Japan)); liver transaminases (ALT/AST), alpha fetoprotein (AFP) (Cobas Integra 411, Roche, Basel, Switzerland), creatinine and glucose/HbA1c level (Cobas Integra 400 plus, Roche, Basel, Switzerland).

Stage of liver disease was assessed using transient Elastography (FibroScan, Echosens, Paris, France) with use of XL probe in patients with high BMI (>30 kg/m2), or FIB 4 score as alternate in those with invalid Fibroscan measures, and persons categorized into stage F0 to F4 fibrosis stage [18].

The following cut-off values were used to determine fibrosis stage: Transient elastography: F0/F1/F2 ≤10.2 kPa; F3 > 10.2 kPa; F4 > 16.3 kPa; and FIB-4: F0/F1/F2 ≤1.45; F3 > 1.45; F4 > 3.25.

We applied generally accepted criteria to determine a valid result using transient elastography:- (i) ≥ 10 valid measurements; (ii) an interquartile range (IQR)/median value less than 30%; and (iii) ≥ 60% measurement success rate.

Abdominal ultrasound was done using Siemens Acuson P300 (Munich, Germany).

All patients with suspicious lesions in ultrasound were examined by triphasic MSCT in ELRIAH using Philips Brilliance CT 16 slice (Philips, Amsterdam, Netherlands).

PARAGRAPH

Treatment protocol: All HCV-RNA-positive participants received a 12 or 24-week course of one of several DAA regimens at ELRIAH in accordance with Egyptian national treatment guidelines and 2014 AASLD [16] and 2014 WHO [17] guidelines for treatment of genotype 4 chronic hepatitis C infection.

24 weeks of treatment, or addition of ribavirin were used for difficult to treat patients (cirrhotics or treatment experienced).

Those with health insurance or government employees were referred to the nearest government treatment programme.

All HBsAg positive patients with HBV DNA >2000 IU/ml were also assessed at ELRIAH for antiviral treatment.

PARAGRAPH

Monitoring protocol: All patients with cirrhosis were followed up at ELRIAH or its satellite facilities at weeks 8 and 12 during treatment, (and weeks 16, 20, and 24 for those receiving 24 weeks of treatment) to dispense medications, and monitor for adverse events and treatment adherence.

The original schedule of monthly follow up visits for all other patients was replaced with provision of monthly medication refills in the village by a visiting physician or pharmacist.

HCV RNA quantification was done 12 weeks after discontinuation of treatment to assess the sustained virological response (i.e. SVR12) as an assessment of cure.

All HBsAg positive persons attended ELRIAH for further assessment for antiviral treatment, and those diagnosed with HCC were referred for specialist assessment and management plan.

PARAGRAPH

Programme modifications during implementation: From June 2015 to June 2018, this project was rolled out from one village - Al-Othmanya in Gharbiah governorate to initially 10 villages in Dakahlia and Damietta governorates, and then 62 other villages in 5 more governorates (Figure 1).

Key modifications made to the protocol used in the initial village [12] during scale-up included:- (i) More structured community training: A more structured and focused 1-2 day training for village committee members and volunteer village promoters, using printed materials, booklets and videos, with a focus on most frequently asked questions; (ii) More targeted Educational campaign, with use of the village community meeting hall for large public awareness and educational sessions (between 5-10 events) followed by smaller sessions in the community or home visits, and supplemented by regular announcements on local TV channels, and additional educational sessions for local barbers and informal health workers (iii) Simplification of follow-up care: after the initial 10 villages, the frequency of clinic visits was reduced from the initial arrangement of weeks 4,8,12, (and weeks 16, 20, and 24 for those received 24 weeks of treatment) to a single initial assessment visit.

The approximately 40% of persons with cirrhosis or advanced fibrosis (ie.

F3 or 4) continued to have more regular follow-up at 2 to 4 month intervals; (iv) Expansion of DAA regimen treatment options from sofosbuvir and ribavirin alone to include sofosbuvir with daclatasvir as the main DAA regimen in use, but also sofobuvir and ledipasvir, and ombitasvir, pariaprevir and ritonavir; (v) Simplification of medication refills: The need for monthly visits to collect medication at ELRIAH was avoided by a physician or pharmacist delivering drug provisions to the village (and removing empty boxes) every month at designated times organised by the village coordinator (vi) Blood sample collection for RNA PCR: the immediate collection and transport of blood samples for HCV RNA or HBV DNA in those positive on RDT for HCV antibody or HBsAg to one of 20 satellite ELRIAH laboratories.

There were some additional modifications in implementation of the protocols for each village.

For example, in Hurgada, since a significant proportion of local population work in tourism and are covered by health insurance, our programme targeted the uninsured (mainly local inhabitants, or those with temporary employment).

SECTION

Outcomes to evaluate effectiveness of testing and treatment programme

PARAGRAPH

Among those who were eligible for testing, key outcomes assessed in each village were:- the number and proportion of those eligible for testing programme in each village who had serological testing, linkage to HCV-RNA PCR testing and assessment of stage of liver disease of those positive on serology, initiation of treatment in those who were HCV-RNA positive, completion of treatment, adverse events leading to discontinuation, and attainment of SVR12, including proportion with virological failure.

We assessed coverage of treatment and cure among all those estimated to be infected in each village.

This was calculated by applying viraemic prevalence in each village to the eligible population aged 12 to 80 years from 2015 national census records in each village.

Assessment of outcomes in villagers treated for chronic HBV infection, or with HCC, or who were referred to the government programme were not available for this analysis.

SECTION

Outcomes to evaluate effectiveness of educational campaign to prevent new infections

PARAGRAPH

The effectiveness of the educational campaign was evaluated in the original demonstration project in Al-Othmanya village based on a comprehensive knowledge, attitudes and practices (KAP) survey, pre and post educational campaign and showed improved awareness, knowledge and adoption of safer practices [12].

This was not repeated in the 72 further villages as it is highly labour intensive and costly, and the impact of the educational programme had already been well established in the first village [12].

In addition, we assessed the incidence of new infections in the demonstration village among villagers who were HCV antibody negative during the original screening programme, and confirmed a very low incidence new infections (incidence rate of 0.18/1000py (95% CI = 0.03-0.6) [13].

We also assessed the uptake of three doses of hepatitis B vaccine in those HCV antibody positive.

PARAGRAPH

Ethics approval: The study protocol was approved by the Research and Ethical Committee of Al-Mansoura University in April 2015.

The protocol and conduct of the study complied with the International Ethical Guidelines for Biomedical Research Involving Human Subjects [19].

PARAGRAPH

Statistical Analysis: Characteristics of HCV RNA positive and HBsAg positive individuals were summarised according to demographic, clinical and laboratory and treatment categories, with median and interquartile range (IQR) for quantitative data, and frequency and percent for qualitative data.

We compared the two groups using Mann-Whitney test and Chi-square test for qualitative variables.

Outcomes were reported as number and % and for each village.

Across all villages, outcome data was reported as total and 95% confidence intervals (CI).

Univariate and mutivariant stepwise logistic regression analysis was used to examine patient level factors associated with treatment failure.

Variables examined were age, gender, DAA regimen and duration of treatment, presence of cirrhosis and presence of co-morbidities.

SECTION

Results

SECTION

Outcomes of testing and treatment across continuum of care

PARAGRAPH

There were 221855 persons aged between 12 to 80 years across the 73 villages eligible for inclusion in the test and treat programme.

This represents 71.4% of total population of 310814 across all villages, and excludes 83800 (27.0%) children under 12 years old and 5159 (1.7%) who were older than 80 years.

The median population size of the villages was 4220 (range 177 to 15807), and the majority (92%, n=67) were farming villages in the Nile Delta (Figure 1).

PARAGRAPH

Table 1 and Figures 2 and 3 summarize the outcomes of the testing and treatment programme along the cascade of care in the 73 villages between June 2015 and June 2018.

Of the 221855 eligible persons, a further 17106 (7.7%) were excluded:- of these, 5320 (31.1%) self-reported that they had been previously diagnosed, treated and cured for HCV infection prior to the start of this programme, 5953 (34.8%) were absent at the time of the testing activity, and 5833 (34.1%) declined testing.

PARAGRAPH

Of the 221855 eligible villagers, 204749 persons (92.3%, 95% CI 91.6-93.5) were screened for HCV antibody and HBsAg using 15 minute result rapid test kits in the community.

Of these, 33839 (16.5%, 95% CI 12.2-17.1) were HCV antibody positive and 763 (0.4%, 95% CI 0.3-0.5) were HBsAg positive.

All 33839 HCV antibody positive persons (100%, 95% CI 100-100) had either immediate samples taken and transported for HCV RNA to ELRIAH liver center (or the nearest ELRIAH satellite center) or within a few days, and 15892 (47.0%, 95% CI 44.4-52.1) were positive.

Overall, prevalence of HCV viremia was 7.8%, 95% CI 6.6-7.9 (15892 of 204749 tested).

All HCV-RNA positive persons completed a full baseline assessment with liver function tests, full blood count, AFP, transient elastography or calculation of FIB4 score in 17 patients with invalid FibroScan results for staging of liver disease, and abdominal ultrasonography for detection of HCC.

3192 cases were identified with cirrhosis (20·1%) and 166 (5.2% of cirrhotics) were diagnosed with HCC.

PARAGRAPH

Of the 15892 persons who were HCV RNA positive, 14495 (91.2%, 95% CI 89.9-96.4) received DAA treatment through the ELRIAH programme using various DAA regimens, and the remaining 1397 (8.8%) (mainly governmental employees) were referred to nearest government HCV treatment programme facility (specialized hospitals of Ministry of Health, and Military or Police hospitals).

The majority received a same day result for RDT, and HCV RNA results usually within one week.

The median time from positive serological diagnosis to treatment was 2.1 weeks (IQR: 0.6 to 3.3 weeks).

PARAGRAPH

Of the 14495 initiating treatment, the majority (57.8%) received a 24 week regimen (mainly sofosbuvir and ribavirin (72.1%), sofosbuvir and daclatasvir (15.7%) and sofosbuvir, daclatasvir and ribavirin (12.2%), and 42.2% received 12 weeks (mainly sofosbuvir and daclatasvir (43.2%), sofosbuvir and ribavirin (22.0%), and sofosbuvir, daclatasvir and ribavirin (16.7%)).

14482 (99.9%) returned for HCV RNA testing to confirm viral clearance or cure (i.e. SVR12) and 14238 (98.3%) achieved SVR12 (Table 2 and Fig. 2).

Thirteen cases did not have an SVR12 (6 discontinued treatment due to serious adverse events (liver decompensation in 4, or severe renal impairment in 2) and 7 were lost to follow up.

Treatment failure occurred in 244 (1.7%) – defined as detectable HCV RNA at SVR12.

The majority (86.9%) of these were among those who received SOF/RBV, and 40% were among cirrhotics who received SOF/RBV (Table 3).

They were all retreated with Ombitasvir, Paritaprevir, and Ritonavir + RBV or Sofosbuvir plus Daclatasvir + RBV, and all of them achieved sustained virological response.

Five patients (5/244, 2.0%) did not achieve SVR, and required a third treatment course with elbasvir and grazoprevir + ribavirin.

All five ultimately achieved SVR12.

Overall, we estimated coverage of treatment and cure in 14482 (84.6%) of the estimated 17137 infected persons across the 73 villages.

This includes the 244 persons who initially failed treatment and responded to retreatment.

It does not include the 1397 (8.8%) referred to the government treatment programme for which do not have information on treatment uptake or SVR rates.

PARAGRAPH

Characteristics of 15892 HCV RNA positive and 763 HBsAg positive persons (Table 3)

PARAGRAPH

Of the 15892 HCV-Ab and RNA positive persons, 71·9% were aged between 30-59 years and 49·3% were male.

The majority (63·0%) had F0-F1 stage of liver disease, 20·1% had cirrhosis (F4) and 16·9% had advanced fibrosis (F3) based on transient elastography or FIB-4 score.

73.4% had an HCV RNA viral load less than 800000 IU/ml.

None were co-infected with HBsAg.

Of the 763 (0·4%) HBsAg positive persons, 72·0% were aged between 30-59 years and 67·4% were male.

Only 12·5% were HBeAg positive and 654 (85·7%) were positive for HBV DNA (as defined by a viral load >2000 IU/ml).

The majority (69·4%) had F0-F1 stage of liver disease, 11·5% had cirrhosis (F4) and 9·2% had advanced fibrosis.

All the 654 patients started treatment, mainly with Entecavir (64·5%) (Table 2).

Compared to HCV RNA positive persons, those HBsAg positive were significantly more likely to be male (67.4% vs. 49.3%), younger by about 10 years (median aged 43.2 vs. 52 years), and less likely to have advanced disease (11.5% vs 20.1% F4), abnormal liver function (10.4% vs. 43.7%) and one or more co-morbidities (hypertension, diabetes or obesity) (25.1% vs. 8.3%) (All p<0.001).

SECTION

Outcomes of HCC screening

PARAGRAPH

Of the 3192 HCV infected persons with cirrhosis, 230 cirrhotic cases showed focal lesions by ultrasonography with or without elevated AFP.

166 of these cases (5.2% of the 3192 with cirrhosis) were confirmed to have HCC on the basis of triphasic abdominal CT which had been previously undiagnosed.

The remaining 64 cases were non-enhancing nodules and considered non-malignant focal lesions.

All but 3 cases were aged 50 years or more and 92·8% were male.

30.7% of HCC cases had a normal AFP.

60.8% had multiple tumors, and 63·9% had at least one lesion more than 3 cm in size.

59·6% of cases had local tumors, and 44·6% had portal vein invasion.

SECTION

Patient and village level factors associated with treatment failure

PARAGRAPH

There were 244 (1.7%) virological failures at SVR12.

Multivariable stepwise logistic regression analysis showed that the most important patient factors associated with treatment failure were the presence of cirrhosis (vs. no cirrhosis) on FibroScan (RR= 2.5, 95% CI 1.41-4.42, p<0.001) and older age >60 years (RR=1.96, 95% CI 1.93-1.99, p=0.003).

Other variables (gender, DAA regimen and duration of treatment and presence of co-morbidities) were not statistically significant.

Nine villages had treatment failure rates >5%, and 8 belonged to one district (El-Manzala, Dakahlia).

Five of these villages had a population of less than 1000, and 7 had particularly high rates of advanced liver disease (>30% with cirrhosis).

PARAGRAPH

PARAGRAPH

All villages shared the costs with ELRIAH in implementation of this programme.

The proportion of financial costs contributed by each village is summarised in Web Annex and ranged from 10% (in village 73) to up to 80% (villages 2-5).

The remaining costs were paid by ELRIAH through its donations programme.

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

To our knowledge, this is the first large-scale comprehensive community/village-based HCV elimination programme in the general population that employed both preventative/educational approaches alongside testing and treatment.

This educate, test and treat model was described initially in one village in northern Egypt [12] but has now been implemented in 73 villages across 7 different governorates in Egypt covering more than 300,000 villagers, with an overall prevalence of HCV viremia of 7.8%.

The expanded programme achieved considerable success at all steps along the diagnosis, care and treatment cascade in the 73 villages.

There was high level acceptance and uptake of testing by 204749 persons (92.3%) using rapid diagnostic tests for hepatitis C and B among the 221855 eligible villagers aged 12 to 80 years; near complete linkage of all HCV antibody positive through same day reflex confirmatory viral load testing; initiation of DAA treatment in 91.2% of those confirmed HCV viraemic (with the remaining 8.8% referred to local government treatment programme), completion of treatment by 99.9% and attainment of cure (SVR12) in 98.3% of those treated.

Overall, we estimated coverage with treatment and cure in more than 84% of estimated 17137 infected persons across the villages, or more than 90% if those referred to government programme are assumed to have been treated and cured.

PARAGRAPH

The most striking success in scale-up of this community-based model was in overcoming the key challenges encountered with other large scale national and community HCV test and treat programmes – namely, the low uptake of HCV RNA following positive serology, and following treatment to confirm cure, as well as overall poor access and testing coverage among the general population in rural areas [20-22].

There were several distinctive features of our approach that contributed to its successful implementation across a wide range of villages [12].

First and foremost, the strong community engagement, empowerment and commitment to implementing the project activities through community-based associations (CBAs), local village leadership and largely female village promoters in each village.

This meant that the community was an active partner in both the awareness raising and behaviour change campaign, fund raising and promotion of testing, linkage and follow-up.

The close contact between villagers, village promoters and the ELRIAH team meant that there was rarely any loss of contact with patients during programme implementation in each village - from initial RDT test, immediate sample collection for viral load, arrangement of clinic visit assessment and initiation of treatment, and SVR test of cure assessment.

Second, the organization of testing at a household level ensured both high uptake of testing and effective case-finding, and equity in access regardless of gender, age, income level or stage of disease.

A further factor in the impressive linkage was the high level of motivation among the villagers and that all aspects of testing, care and treatment were free.

Third, it also showed that fund-raising in the local community was possible through the active support of wealthier villager in covering the financial costs of HCV management.

The other key programme successes in the wider implementation were the integrated testing and management of chronic HBV infection, concomitant screening for co-morbidities and HCC, which resulted in a high detection rate of early HCC at a stage when it can be treated, and successful identification and prompt retreatment of initial HCV treatment failures.

PARAGRAPH

Based on the experience gained from the initial demonstration project in Al-Othmanya village and subsequent expansion to 10 further villages, several key modifications were made in the implementation approach in the other 62 villages that have simplified the care pathway and reduced costs.

This included a reduction in the number of ELRIAH clinic visits required for assessment and medication refill from monthly during treatment to a single baseline assessment visit, with only cirrhotic patients continuing to attend more regularly (every 2-4 months).

DAA medication refill clinic visits were also replaced with a monthly village delivery by the ELRIAH team (physician or pharmacist).

The availability of the 15 minute RDT test result enabled immediate sample collection (or within a few days) and transport for HCV RNA at ELRIAH site (or the nearest ELRIAH satellite), and achieved both 100% viral load uptake and reduced time to receipt of an HCV RNA result to around one week.

Together these measures have significantly shortened the time taken to complete the testing and treatment programme in each village from one year in the case of the initial village to now around 4-6 months.

There have also been other cost efficiencies.

The educational/awareness raising training and programme has also been shortened and made more focused.

In addition, more intensive advance promotion of scheduled village testing events by ELRIAH and local team have increased participation in testing activities and enabled more optimal use of capacity of high-throughput HCV RNA viral load instruments at ELRIAH (with samples collected from more than 1000 persons in a single day in large villages).

PARAGRAPH

We acknowledge several limitations that are relevant to generalizability of our findings and improvements as scale-up of this model continues in other villages.

The 73 villages included were all self-selected based on their strong interest, and community advocacy and commitment which ensured in general high level participation in testing, treatment and follow-up.

Results may be less impressive in villages without this level of commitment.

The level of elimination in the villages may be reduced also if a significant proportion of the 5320 (31.1%) who were excluded at the start because of self-reported previous diagnosis, treatment and cure were still infected or had become re-infected.

The use of lamivudine antiviral therapy in almost one third of HBV patients reflecting local drug access is sub-optimal as it has a low genetic barrier to resistance, and tenofovir and entecavir are the recommended antiviral drugs [23].

Finally, educational activities were focused on behavioural change in the general population, and not on government health facilities and dentists to address outstanding issues with injection safety and infection control, which would have required formal MOH approval and collaboration.

PARAGRAPH

There are several other important observations and data from this project that have relevance to continued scale up of viral hepatitis treatment response in Egypt as well as in other national programmes in LMICs:

PARAGRAPH

High SVR rates despite sub-optimal regimens: High SVR rates were achieved overall (98.3%) despite use of regimens (sofosbuvir/RBV in 51% of treated patients) that would now be considered sub-optimal because they may require 24 weeks of treatment, additional monitoring as they include ribavirin, and are not pan-genotypic.

However, Egypt has predominantly genotype 4 infection, which is associated with more favourable SVR rates with this regimen.

Our experience of 89.6% SVR12 in cirrhotics and 98% in non-cirrhotics is comparable to previous reports on use of 24 weeks of sofosbuvir/ribavirin regimens [24-29].

Our population characteristics were also favourable – 94.2% were treatment naïve, and 78% were non-cirrhotic.

Professional society and WHO guidelines now recommend use of pan-genotypic regimens including sofosbuvir/daclatasvir, ledipasvir/sofosbuvir, sofosbuvir/velpatasvir and Glecaprevir/Pibrentasvir for 12 weeks and discontinuation of genotyping [26-30].

PARAGRAPH

Early detection and re-treatment of virological failures: There was a treatment failure rate of 1.7% with initial treatment.

The majority (86.9%) of these were among patients who had received the less optimal SOF/RBV regimen, and 40% were among cirrhotics receiving SOF/RBV.

All 244 were re-evaluated and received a further treatment course within a median of 2.1 weeks (range 1.3-3.2) of identification of treatment failure, with either ombitasvir/ritonavir/partiprever plus ribavirin for 12 weeks (n=103) or sofosbuvir+ daclatasvir plus ribavirin for 24 weeks (n=141).

Both regimens have achieved high SVR rates in Egyptian patient cohorts [31,32]).

Only five patients did not achieve initial SVR, but did so after a third treatment course with elbasvir and grazoprevir + ribavirin.

This highlights the importance of maintaining careful assessment of SVR, as with large national programmes, this can account for a substantial number (an estimated 80,000 of the 3.5 to 4.2 million in need of treatment in Egypt) and could contribute to ongoing transmission if not identified promptly.

The successful treatment of these treatment failures in the first 10 villages was also a strong motivator for patients to attend for confirmation of SVR result.

PARAGRAPH

Advanced liver disease and HCC detection: In our community based programme, we identified the presence of advanced liver disease in 37% of HCV RNA positive persons (20.1% had cirrhosis (F4) and 16.9% had advanced fibrosis (F3).

Of note, the majority were staged using transient elastography using the latest Fibroscan machine (Echosens 502) together with the XL probes in obese patients and two independent operators (more than 50% had a BMI >30 kg/m2).

These patients will require long-term regular follow-up for surveillance of HCC as well as for potential complications of cirrhosis.

Among those with HCV viremia and evidence of cirrhosis, 166 (5.2%) were diagnosed with previously unrecognised HCC.

Of note, 55.5 % of these cases were discovered at relatively early stage (Barcelona Liver Clinic cancer (BCLC) stages 0, A and B) for which there were still treatment options, such as surgery or transarterial chemoembolization (TACE).

The integration of HCC screening into community outreach activities to identify early undiagnosed HCC that are amenable to treatment is therefore an important activity to maximize impact of the programme on morbidity and mortality.

This significant detection rate of HCC with planned re-screen of the 3192 persons with cirrhosis during 2018-2019 will help further inform the debate and uncertainty regarding increased incidence of HCC after DAAs [33].

PARAGRAPH

Integration of HBV screening and treatment: This programme integrated screening for HBsAg and subsequent referral for treatment assessment.

The overall HBsAg prevalence of 0.4% in this largely rural population in Lower Egypt is slightly lower than that reported nationally (0.9%-1.4%) [2,34,35].

There were key differences between those who were HBsAg positive compared to those who were HCV viraemic: a higher proportion were male (67.4% vs. 49.3%, p<0.0001), younger (median age of 43 vs. 52 years, p<0.0001 and 41.1% vs. 14.5% <40 years, p<0.0001), and a lower proportion with cirrhosis/advanced fibrosis (19.7% vs. 37.1%, p<0.0001) [34,35].

A high proportion (86%) were HBV DNA positive (defined as a viral load >2000 IU/ml) and were started on treatment with entecavir [36].

There is a need for additional longitudinal studies to better understand the spectrum and natural history of chronic HBV infection in sub-Saharan Africa.

PARAGRAPH

Engaging with the community and villages with a systematic approach testing and treatment scale-up is now a critical component of the Egyptian national response. .

The Egyptian Ministry of Health is now undertaking a major surge in testing of the general population to improve case-finding - with more than 45 million tested between October 2018 and end of March 2019 [37].

Close coordination with the national programme is critical, and includes contributing data to the national database which is collating data on those treated through the national programme, health insurance, military and police, and non-governmental organisations, and sharing of all educational and training materials and standard operating procedures on ELRIAH website (www.liver-ri.org.eg/en/liver-research-institute-hospital/liver) to support the establishment of other village-based educational and awareness programmes.

PARAGRAPH

There are also opportunities for further programme improvements that can be addressed in the current national test and treat surge, that include the following: Expansion to include testing and treatment in adolescents and children above 12 years: although we found a low proportion positive among those aged 12 to 18 years, there is now regulatory approval of DAA regimens and recommendations from professional society and WHO guidelines for treatment in this age group [26,27,38].

It is important that children are now included in testing and treatment programmes offering an earlier opportunity of a life free of hepatitis C infection and associated stigma.

Inclusion of Injection safety as part of educational programme: One of the constraints of the existing educate, treat and test initiative is that educational activities were focused on behavioural change in general population, as well as on barber shops and female health educators.

Engagement with health facilities and dentists to address outstanding issues with injection safety and infection control will require formal approval and collaboration with MOH.

There is a need for additional follow-up to validate elimination, that will include data about the incidence of new cases, as well as rate of decompensation in patients with cirrhosis, and incidence of HCC after DAAs.

Investigation and quality assurance support for villages with outlier outcomes: The programme presented a further opportunity to provide enhanced support to certain villages that were outliers on different outcomes (10 villages with higher rates of HCV viraemia >12%, 4 villages with treatment uptake <50% and 9 villages with higher treatment failure rates >5%).

There is also ongoing follow-up of the HBsAg positive persons initiated on long-term suppressive anti-viral therapy.

PARAGRAPH

Finally, there are opportunities for further efficiencies and simplification of the process to promote and accelerate scale-up.

This may include access to a point of care test for HCV viraemia that can be used easily in the field such as Gene Expert for more remote areas, as well as adoption of simple validated blood based non-invasive tests for staging of fibrosis, such as the APRI score [23] that could replace the more expensive FibroScan, and use of other pan-genotypic regimens with shorter treatment duration and without use of ribavirin [39].

We also consider that this village-based viral HCV screening initiative represents an excellent opportunity to integrate with more comprehensive NCD screening, with blood pressure, diabetes and BMI.

Almost one quarter of our 15892 HCV RNA positive study population had one or more significant co-morbidities such as diabetes and/or hypertension/ischaemic heart disease, and 54.7% were considered obese based on a BMI ≥30kg/m2.

SECTION

Conclusion:

PARAGRAPH

The Educate, test and treat model has now been successfully implemented in 73 villages with diagnosis, treatment and cure of around 84% of the estimated infected target population.

We therefore consider our findings confirm substantial progress towards elimination in accordance with the goals of the Egyptian National Action Plan [6] and targets of the WHO Global Hepatitis strategy [26].

Additional impacts of this model have been in raising awareness about hepatitis C and its prevention and HBV vaccination among the villagers; early detection and management of HCC; identification of persons with advanced fibrosis or established cirrhosis who require ongoing monitoring following treatment; successful retreatment of those with treatment failure.

ELRIAH is currently implementing the model in 30 other villages, and continues to enroll others from the waiting list of villages requesting participation.