10.1016/j.jhep.2019.12.002

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Alginate microencapsulated human hepatocytes for the treatment of acute liver failure in children

SECTION

METHODS

SECTION

Animal studies

PARAGRAPH

Sprague Dawley (Harlan Olec, Bicester, UK) male rats 8-12 weeks old and weight between 200 to 400g were used as the recipients of human hepatocyte microbeads (HMBs).

Animals were maintained in conventional housing facilities and received standard care.

They were housed in a room kept at a temperature of 21±2°C, humidity of 55±10% and 12-hour light-dark cycle with ad libitum food and water.

After acclimatisation, all experimental procedures were performed following protocols approved by the Ethical Review Committee of King’s College London in accordance with the UK Animals (Scientific) Procedures Act of 1986.

SECTION

Human hepatocytes

PARAGRAPH

Human hepatocytes used in initial animal experiments were cryopreserved cells from King’s College Hospital hepatocyte research bank stored at -140 °C.

Cells were isolated from donor liver tissue (rejected or unused for transplantation) using a collagenase perfusion technique.

Hepatocytes were thawed using a quick thawing technique (18, 19).

Cell viability and number were checked using trypan blue exclusion test after thawing.

Cells with viability ≥60% were used for encapsulation.

SECTION

Microencapsulation of hepatocytes

PARAGRAPH

Empty and hepatocyte microbeads (EMBs and HMBs) were produced using the previously published optimised technique by our group (17).

Briefly, hepatocyte microbeads were produced using the IE-50R encapsulator (Inotech Encapsulation AG, Dottikon, Switzerland) with a 250-μm nozzle and sterile clinical grade reagents.

Ultrapure sodium alginate, with low-viscosity and high- guluronate (PRONOVA™ SLG20; NovaMatrix, Sandvika, Norway) was dissolved in 0.9% NaCl to give a final concentration of 1.5% alginate solution (w/v), and mixed with cells at the density of 2.5x106 cell/ml alginate.

Microbeads were cross-linked in 1.2% CaCl2 solution for 10 min then washed twice with 0.9% NaCl to remove excess Ca2+ ions.

The microbeads mean diameter was 500 SD 100 μm.

SECTION

Intraperitoneal transplantation of human hepatocyte microbead (HMBs) in normal rats

PARAGRAPH

The initial phase of this study was to investigate the function and immune response of the optimised HMBs in vivo by transplantation into normal Sprague Dawley rats in order to assess their suitability for clinical application.

Animals were divided into two groups (n=3 each).

Group 1, transplanted with EMBs, and Group 2 transplanted with HMBs.

The microbeads were suspended in transplant medium CMRL (Connaught Medical Research Laboratories) and were transplanted intraperitoneally via 18-guage intravascular catheter under sterile technique at a dose of 10ml/kg.

Blood samples were collected on day 1, 3, and 7 post-transplantation to evaluate the function of HMBs by measuring human serum albumin.

Human serum albumin in rat serum samples was detected using an ELISA quantitation kit (Bethyl Laboratories, Montgomery, USA).

Blood samples pre-transplantation (day 0) and EMBs groups were used as controls.

Transplanted rats were followed for 1 week.

At day 7, microbeads were retrieved from the abdomen by laparotomy under anaesthesia.

The retrieved microbeads were collected for further analysis.

SECTION

Ex-vivo evaluation of hepatocyte microbeads

PARAGRAPH

The morphology, cell viability and function of HMBs were examined pre- and post-transplantation according to published protocol (17, 20).

Cell viability of HMBs was evaluated using cell membrane integrity assay, fluorescein diacetate (FDA)/propidium iodide (PI) staining.

Overall metabolic activity of encapsulated hepatocytes was assessed using methylthiazolyldiphenyl-tetrazolium bromide (MTT) test.

Hepatocyte specific functions of microbeads consisting of albumin production, urea synthesis and cytochrome P450 (CYP1A1/2) activity were studied in the supernatant (culture medium).

The retrieved HMBs were also evaluated for host cell adhesion to their surface to determine the extent of host immune response (21).

SECTION

Clinical studies

SECTION

Patients

PARAGRAPH

Ethical approval to perform hepatocyte microbeads transplantation in patients with ALF was obtained from the national research ethics committee (REC 08/H0808/5).

The patients treated included infants and children under the age of 18 years with a diagnosis of ALF [defined by the presence of coagulopathy , international normalised ratio (INR) ≥1.5 not correctable by parenteral vitamin K] in the presence of clinical hepatic encephalopathy (HE), a INR ≥2.0 regardless of HE, in the absence of known evidence of chronic liver disease (22)].

All children met listing criteria for transplantation as defined by the National Health Service Blood and Transplant service.

To simplify screening of potentially suitable candidates, King’s College Hospital criteria were used to predict those who had a 90% mortality risk without liver transplantation for (INR ≥ 4, bilirubin ≥ 235 μmol/L, age < 2 year and WBC > 9×109/L (3, 22)).

A final decision on whether it was appropriate to treat a patient using the HMB on a named -patient basis was made by the multidisciplinary team overseeing the care of the patient.

Informed written consent was obtained from patients’ parents for use of this as named patient basis treatment.

This intervention was also approved by the hospital’s new and novel procedures committee.

As patients were also listed for liver transplantation contemporaneously in all cases but one, HMBs were offered as an additional treatment.

Contraindications to HMBs were uncontrolled sepsis causing unmanageable cardiorespiratory instability, tense ascites causing respiratory compromise, intra-abdominal sepsis or malignancy, presence of adhesions or fistulae to the anterior abdominal wall, if imminent (same day) liver transplantation was expected or severe haemodyamic instability to tolerate the procedure.

SECTION

Preparation of human hepatocyte microbeads under GMP conditions

PARAGRAPH

All the procedures involving hepatocyte isolation, cryopreservation and encapsulation were conducted under GMP conditions in the King’s College Hospital Cell Therapy Unit.

Human hepatocytes were isolated from donor liver tissue unused/rejected for transplantation.

Microbeads were prepared from cryopreserved human hepatocytes with cell viability ≥ 60%.

Detailed methods for cell preparation and encapsulation have been previously described (17-20)

SECTION

Intraperitoneal transplantation of hepatocyte microbeads

PARAGRAPH

The infusion of alginate HMBs into the intra-peritoneal cavity was undertaken in the intensive care unit under continuous cardiorespiratory monitoring.

All children aside from one were ventilated as part of the management of acute liver failure at the time of infusion.

Prior to treatment, INR was corrected to < 2 and platelets > 50,000 / microlitre.

A 16-gauge cannula was placed under ultrasound guidance through the anterior abdominal wall and between 5 – 20 ml/kg/session of alginate HMBs in CMRL were infused over 20 - 45 minutes under ultrasound guidance (Figure 1).

The dose was calculated to approximate 25 million cells per ml alginate.

Patients were monitored for vital signs, abdominal distention, intestinal ileus, bleeding in the abdomen, urine output and signs of anaphylaxis or infection.

All the children were monitored and managed as per standard for ALF.

Patients remained on the LT waiting list unless clear improvement in liver function was observed and the clinical team decided that LT was no longer necessary.

PARAGRAPH

Patients were followed regularly and according to clinical need.

In all but two cases (one of whom died and no autopsy was performed), HMBs were washed out from the peritoneum laparoscopically (n=3) or at time of transplant (n=3).

The morphology, cell viability and functional assays were performed on the recovered HMBs.

SECTION

Statistical analysis

PARAGRAPH

Data were analysed using GraphPad Prism® 8 software (GraphPad, San Diego, CA).

Continuous variables are expressed as mean ± standard deviation or median and range.

Changes in continuous variables from baseline to recovery were analysed using students t test or Wilcoxon assigned rank test as appropriate.

Statistical significance was set at p <0.05.

SECTION

RESULTS

SECTION

Assessment of functioning and safety of microbeads in vivo

PARAGRAPH

To determine the safety and function of encapsulated HMBs prior to clinical use, EMB and HMBs produced by clinical grade materials were tested by transplantation into the peritoneal cavity of normal rats.

All animals tolerated the procedure well without any complications.

Human serum albumin was detected in peripheral blood of rats transplanted with HMBs on day 1 (32.6±5.8 ng/ml), day 3 (10.3±2.9 ng/ml) and dropped to a low level on day 7 (1.7±0.1 ng/ml) post-transplantation.

There were no signs of inflammation or adhesion of microbeads to any structure within the peritoneal cavity at 7 days after transplantation.

Some microbeads were loosely attached to the omentum and mesentery but detached easily after flushing with transplant medium.

The retrieved microbeads were intact without any deformities.

There was a small number of EMBs (≤ 1%) minimally covered with adherent host cells, while with HMBs the surface was totally clear (Figure 2).

The retrieved HMBs contained viable hepatocytes as demonstrated by FDA / PI staining and MTT activity of 0.6±0.3 OD reading/100mg HMBs.

Hepatocyte function for albumin (10.2±0.6 ng/mg protein), urea (1.19 ±0.02 μg/mg protein) and CYP1A1/2 activity (7.9±1.1 pmol/mg protein/min) were detected in the culture medium.

SECTION

Clinical features of patients and outcomes

PARAGRAPH

Eight children (4 males) with ALF were treated on a named-patient basis under an MHRA specials license.

All children met listing criteria and all children were listed for liver transplant at the time of HMB infusion aside from one child who had an absolute contraindication to transplantation.

Demographic data is presented in Table 1.

Median age was 28 days (range; 1 day - 6 years).

Six patients weighed less than 3.5 kg.

The diagnosis in four children was neonatal haemochromatosis (NH), disseminated herpes simplex virus type 1 in one, adenovirus associated liver failure in one, and in two children no cause could be identified.

At a later time point, genetic analysis allowed the identification of a pathogenic homozygous mutation in Neuroblastoma-Amplified Sequence (NBAS) in one of these children (patient 8).

Median INR (range) at admission was 3.2 (2.2-4.1), and total bilirubin 135.5 (52-364 μmol/L).

The median maximum INR and total bilirubin were 5.8 (5.2 – 14.1) and 223 (99-482 μmol/L), respectively.

Patient 1, 2 and 8 had markedly raised ALT (1877, 1270 and 5665 IU/L) whereas other patients presented with mildly raised ALT (median of 41 range 22-58 IU/L).

PARAGRAPH

Intraperitoneal transplantation of HMBs was performed on day 3-8 (patient 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7 and 8) after admission to our centre.

Patient 4 and patient 7 received the first infusion of microbeads on day 14 after admission and required second infusion on day 21 and 33, respectively, after initial clinical improvement followed by subsequent clinical decline.

Two patients were transplanted with ABO-incompatible hepatocytes in microbeads.

Both patients were less than 1 year of age.

PARAGRAPH

Total cell number transplanted in microbeads ranged from 1.5x107 to 3.0x107cells/kg with the median of 2.4x107cells/kg in each session of transplantation (Table 2).

The viability of cells in microbeads immediately after encapsulation was evaluated by FDA/PI staining and overall metabolic activity with MTT assay (2.10±0.56 OD reading/100mg HMBs).

The viability decreased after maintenance in culture for 7 days at which time MTT was 14% of the initial value.

Albumin and urea production gradually decreased over the time in culture.

However, CYP1A1/2 activity was increased at day 3 and then diminished slightly at day 7 (Supplementary Figure 1 and supplementary Table 1).

All the patients tolerated the procedure well with no post-infusion complications.

Three patients required continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) as part of standard ALF management.

All patients with NH also received exchange transfusions, intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG), antioxidant cocktail and iron chelation.

None of these patients had been treated antenatally with IVIG.

In all patients, blood products including fresh frozen plasma (FFP) were given to support the profound coagulopathy or the need for invasive procedure.

PARAGRAPH

In summary, of the 8 patients, 4 recovered spontaneously and avoided the need for LT (patient 1, 3, 6 and 8) while 3 were bridged to LT (patient 2, 4, and 7).

Longer term outcome (up to 8 years) is good in all 7 who survived.

Patient 8, who 2 years later was found to have a mutation in NBAS, recovered fully from the initial episode of ALF however presented one year later with an INR of 16 and encephalopathy.

Intraperitoneal transplantation of HMB was planned, but unable to be performed due to technical problems in the production laboratory of microbeads at that point, hence liver transplantation was performed as standard of care.

Addition clinical information of the patients describes in supplementary text.

SECTION

Metabolic, morphology and function of retrieved hepatocyte

PARAGRAPH

In three patients (2, 4 and 7)) microbeads were retrieved at the time of LT which was on day 4, day 14 and 30 after the first infusion of HMBs, respectively.

Large numbers of HMBs were found scattered throughout the peritoneal cavity predominantly localised around the omentum but were easy to remove by irrigation.

Macroscopically, there were no signs of inflammation or adhesions between intra-abdominal organs.

The retrieved HMBs had maintained their physical integrity as seen under light microscopy.

Their surface appeared smooth and free from host immune cells such as lymphocytes (Figure 3).

The retrieved HMBs were stained with FDA/PI and appeared green under fluorescence microscopy indicating that the cells were viable.

Interestingly, the retrieved microbeads maintained their viability and function after 7 further days in culture (Supplementary Figure 2).

The HMBs were electively retrieved from patient 3, 6 and 8 via laparoscopy at 3 months, 6 months and 3 months post-transplantation respectively.

Laparoscopy at 3 months demonstrated HMBs attached as a small clump in the pelvic cavity.

There was no evidence of fibrosis, adhesion or gross peritoneal reaction.

The clusters of microbeads were detached using alligator forceps and only few small clusters of microbeads were obtained.

Some single microbeads were also retrieved by lavage (Figure 4).

Laparoscopy at 6 months after HMB infusion in patient 6 showed multiple HMBs adherent to the omentum, left mesocolon, and behind uterus.

The tissue samples contained fibrovascular tissue including a cluster of microbeads with a nearby giant cell reaction.

Of note, FDA/PI staining were attempted to determine cell viability of these recovered HMBs but was unsuccessful.

Likewise, functional study could not be evaluated due to insufficient numbers of HMBs.

SECTION

DISCUSSION

PARAGRAPH

LT has radically changed the outcome of the patients with ALF.

Given the tremendous regenerative potential of the liver however, spontaneous survival is always a real possibility.

Auxiliary liver transplantation in our experience has shown native liver regeneration and eventual discontinuation of immunosuppression in 65% of children (8).

Animal models of ALF have shown improved survivals with hepatocyte transplantation.

These techniques require the cells to be transplanted either into the liver or the spleen of the animal making it a high-risk procedure if applied in humans, where bleeding risk may outweigh the benefits.

In addition, allogeneic cells necessitates the use of immunosuppression with its inherent side effects particularly in the setting of ALF where the patient is sick and thus naturally immunosuppressed increasing the risks of infections and renal toxicity.

Animal studies of the use of alginate-embedded hepatocytes have shown superior survival to controls in galactosamine-induced acute liver failure.

Laboratory studies on microencapsulated microbeads have shown permeation of vital proteins such as albumin, coagulation factor 7, and waste products such as urea.

Our in vitro studies on clinical grade microencapsulated microbeads were able to reproduce these observations.

PARAGRAPH

In pre-clinical studies, both allo- and xenotransplantation of HMBs have shown promising outcomes in animal models including in non-human primates with ALF (13-16, 23).

As we aimed for clinical use, an optimised protocol for producing HMBs using GMP grade material was established by our group (17).

Prior to treating patients, the suitability and functionality of these optimised HMBs were evaluated in normal healthy rats.

The function of HMBs during and after transplantation was proven by detecting human serum albumin in rat blood for 7 days and in the in-vitro demonstration of viability, albumin and urea production by the retrieved HMBs.

The HMBs were free from host cell adhesion which ensured biocompatibility.

These encouraging results led us to initiate the use of HMBs in humans.

PARAGRAPH

This reported patient series is the first of intraperitoneal transplantation of HMBs in humans.

Our data show that an optimised clinical grade HMBs can be feasibly and safely used for treatment in infants and children with ALF.

The patients included in this study originally had a high predicted mortality rate which was expected to be 90% or more without LT as their INR>4 and also 7 out of 8 were age < 2 years and had bilirubin >235 μmol/L (7, 24).

In general, the prognosis of neonatal liver failure is poor (25).

Gestational alloimmune liver disease associated with neonatal hemochromatosis (GALD–NH) is the most common identifiable cause of ALF in neonates and survival rate with medical treatment (antioxidant and iron chelator) have been reported at 10-20%, although recent treatment using combination with exchange transfusion and IVIG has improved the outcomes in infants with severe GALD-NH still need liver transplantation (26).

Similarly, the poor prognosis of HSV-related ALF in infants has been reported by Verma et al. where 9 out of 11 (81%) died and only 2 who received early parenteral acyclovir therapy survived in which one of them required LT (27).

Treatment of ALF in these infants is difficult as they are so sick and small size, making liver transplantation even more difficult to perform with poorer outcome (28).

LT in small infants remains a medical and surgical challenge because of the size mismatch, vascular complications, and infections.

Moreover, there are only a few centers with experience in performing LT in this specific group.

Of these, the main surgical problem is the lack of appropriately sized organs and subsequently patients may not survive until a suitable organ is available.

Recently, the United Network for Organ Sharing (UNOS) database of LT in infants during a 19-yr period demonstrated 90 infants with NH were listed for LT in which 49% underwent LT, 27% died while awaiting for LT and 7% too sick to transplant (29).

Our series has shown that intraperitoneal transplantation of HMBs could be simply performed in small infants and in severe/sick patients without using immunosuppression, of which 2 received ABO-incompatible HMBs.

Repeated infusions were promptly performed in two patients due to deteriorated condition while waiting for a liver donor.

All patients tolerated the HMB infusion well without complication.

These findings confirm the major advantages of this technique that is feasible and safe in setting of ALF (17,23).

PARAGRAPH

The outcome of children with ALF transplanted with HMBs in our study was very promising with all patients surviving who were eligible for LT. One patient who died was not considered suitable liver transplant candidate and his care was electively withdrawn.

Four patients improved clinically to such an extent that they were delisted for transplantation.

Three patients went on to have liver transplantation; of these 2 infants survived a month or more waiting for a super urgent LT. Though it is not possible to demonstrate efficacy in this case series, the potentially beneficial effects of HMBs may have resulted in the clinical and biochemical improvement observed soon after HMB infusion.

The results are also reflective of previous in vivo studies that intraperitoneal transplantation of HMBs improved survival of animals with ALF by providing metabolic support (13-17, 23).

Aoki et al demonstrated that transplantation of allogenic encapsulated hepatocytes in a rat model of ALF improve liver regeneration within 48 hr after transplantation (30).

On the other hand, two studies reported improvement in survival and biochemical profiles without definite evidence of liver regeneration (16,23).

PARAGRAPH

The total cell number required for treatment of patients with ALF remains controversial and it has never been studied for microencapsulated hepatocytes.

In the preclinical studies, the cell number transplanted as microcapsules needed to support ALF varies greatly between 4% (13) to 30% (14-16, 23) of the total liver mass.

We previously reported a small number of hepatocytes inside microbeads (about 1-2% of total liver mass containing in microbeads suspension 10 ml/kg) could support ALF and improve clinical outcome in rats (17).

The possible explanation is that the optimised microbeads provide an optimal environment for cells in vivo and, therefore, increase their survival and function.

Similarly, the number of cells used in the current study was small and also showed encouraging results in children with ALF.

However, two children, following initial stabilisation, went on to deteriorate with increased need for cardiorespiratory support following the first infusion of HMBs.

This could be due to a decline of metabolic functions of the cells within the HMBs or insufficient cell number for supporting in severe cases.

It is worth mentioning that encapsulated hepatocytes used in this study were cryopreserved hepatocytes which tend to have limited function after thawing (31).

Thus a greater cell number as HMBs would be required to support these patients.

Nevertheless, infusion of a single large volume of HMBs into peritoneal cavity should be avoided as it might lead to rapid increase in intra-abdominal pressure and subsequent abdominal compartment syndrome.

Therefore, repeating transplantation of HMBs may be safer as in these 2 patients.

PARAGRAPH

The important points for consideration in therapeutic application of HMBs are biocompatibility/biotolerability and physical stability in the peritoneum as long as cells are functional (32).

The current study showed that optimised clinical grade HMBs were mechanically stable in the early stage after transplantation and did not provoke an acute phase host inflammatory response.

This could be seen in 3 patients who underwent LT and HMBs - were recovered at the time of LT on day 4, 14 and 30 post infusion.

There were no signs of inflammation in the peritoneum.

The retrieved HMBs were intact without host cell adherence on their surface and also demonstrated continuing function in culture.

These findings were in keeping with our in vitro and in vivo animal data (17).

A chronic inflammatory response to the HMBs followed by formation of granulation tissue was observed in patients who fully recovered and had elective laparoscopic retrieval of microbeads at 3- and 6-months post-infusion.

HMBs were in clumps, surrounded by fibrovascular tissue and giant cell reaction.

Comparable findings reported by Tuch et al. on the retrieval of islet alginate microcapsules at 16 months after the first infusion in diabetic patients (33).

This phenomenon has been suggested as a result of surface imperfection/swelling of microbeads after transplantation (32, 34).

Thus, we recommend removal of HMB laparoscopically as soon as the patient has recovered from ALF possibly before discharge from hospital.

PARAGRAPH

In our animal study, human hepatocytes were used, proteins produced by the donor cells could be demonstrated but this discrimination is much more difficult in human cells to human recipient.

The appropriate discriminators of allogenic transplanted hepatocyte function or its donor identity are not yet available.

Further work is needed to evaluate the use of cryopreserved HMBs for emergency usage (35).

The technique could possibly then be extended to adults with acute liver failure awaiting transplantation or particularly to patients who are currently denied transplantation for social/life style illnesses such as drug overdose or acute alcoholic hepatitis.

PARAGRAPH

In summary, use of intraperitoneal infusion of cryopreserved human hepatocytes microencapsulated in ultrapure GMP grade alginate is feasible and safe to perform even in small infants and could avoid liver transplantation or act as bridge to LT.