10.1016/j.jhep.2018.12.035

ABSTRACT

TITLE

Th17 cell frequency is associated with low bone mass in primary sclerosing cholangitis

PARAGRAPH

Osteoporotic fractures are a major cause of morbidity and reduced quality of life in patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC), a progressive bile duct disease of unknown origin.

Although it is generally assumed that this pathology is a consequence of impaired calcium homeostasis and malabsorption, the cellular and molecular causes of PSC-associated osteoporosis are unknown.

PARAGRAPH

We determined bone mineral density by dual-X-ray absorptiometry and assessed bone microstructure by high-resolution peripheral quantitative computed tomography in patients with PSC.

Laboratory markers of liver and bone metabolism were measured, and liver stiffness was assessed by FibroScan.

We determined the frequency of Th17 cells by the ex vivo stimulation of peripheral blood mononuclear cells in a subgroup of 40 patients with PSC.

To investigate the potential involvement of IL-17 in PSC-associated bone loss, we analyzed the skeletal phenotype of mice lacking Abcb4 and/or Il-17.

PARAGRAPH

Unlike in patients with primary biliary cholangitis, bone loss in patients with PSC was not associated with disease duration or liver fibrosis.

However, we observed a significant negative correlation between the bone resorption biomarker deoxypyridinoline and bone mineral density in the PSC cohort, indicating increased bone resorption.

Importantly, the frequency of Th17 cells in peripheral blood was positively correlated with the urinary deoxypyridinoline level and negatively correlated with bone mass.

We observed that Abcb4-deficient mice displayed a low-bone-mass phenotype, which was corrected by an additional Il-17 deficiency or anti-IL-17 treatment, whereas the liver pathology was unaffected.

PARAGRAPH

Our findings demonstrate that an increased frequency of Th17 cells is associated with bone resorption in PSC.

Whether antibody-based IL-17 blockade is beneficial against bone loss in patients with PSC should be addressed in future studies.

