10.1016/j.jhep.2018.12.005

ABSTRACT

TITLE

Intraductal papillary neoplasm of the bile duct: Assessment of invasive carcinoma and long-term outcomes using MRI

PARAGRAPH

Imaging characteristics for discriminating the malignant potential of intraductal papillary neoplasm of the bile duct (IPNB) still remain unclear.

This study aimed to define the magnetic resonance (MR) imaging findings that help to differentiate IPNB with an associated invasive carcinoma from IPNB with intraepithelial neoplasia and to investigate their significance with respect to long-term outcomes in patients with surgically resected IPNB.

PARAGRAPH

This retrospective study included 120 patients with surgically resected IPNB who underwent preoperative MR imaging with MR cholangiography before surgery from January 2008 and December 2017 in two tertiary referral centers.

Clinical and MR imaging features of IPNB with intraepithelial neoplasia (n = 34) and IPNB with an associated invasive carcinoma (n = 86) were compared.

Regarding significant features for discriminating IPNB with or without an associated invasive carcinoma, recurrence-free survival (RFS) rates were evaluated.

PARAGRAPH

Significant MR imaging findings for differentiating IPNB with an associated invasive carcinoma from IPNB with intraepithelial neoplasia were intraductal visible mass, tumor size ≥2.5 cm, multiplicity of the tumor, bile duct wall thickening, and adjacent organ invasion (all p ≤0.002).

The 1-, 3-, and 5-year RFS rates for surgically resected IPNB were 93.8%, 79.1%, and 70.0%, respectively.

RFS rates were significantly lower in patients with each significant MR imaging finding of IPNB with an associated invasive carcinoma than in those without significant MR imaging findings (all p ≤0.039).

PARAGRAPH

MR imaging with MR cholangiography may be helpful in differentiating IPNB with an associated invasive carcinoma from IPNB with intraepithelial neoplasia.

Significant MR imaging findings of IPNB with an associated invasive carcinoma have a negative impact on RFS.

