10.1016/j.jhep.2018.02.003

ABSTRACT

TITLE

O-GlcNAcylation of RACK1 promotes hepatocellular carcinogenesis

PARAGRAPH

Aberrant oncogenic mRNA translation and protein O-linked β-N-acetylglucosaminylation (O-GlcNAcylation) are general features during tumorigenesis.

Nevertheless, whether and how these two pathways are interlinked remain unknown.

Our previous study indicated that ribosomal receptor for activated C-kinase 1 (RACK1) promoted chemoresistance and growth in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).

The aim of this study is to examine the role of RACK1 O-GlcNAcylation in oncogene translation and HCC carcinogenesis.

PARAGRAPH

The site(s) of RACK1 for O-GlcNAcylation was mapped by mass spectrometry analysis.

HCC cell lines were employed to examine the effects of RACK1 O-GlcNAcylation on the translation of oncogenic factors and behaviors of tumor cells in vitro.

Transgenic knock-in mice were used to detect the role of RACK1 O-GlcNAcylation in modulating HCC tumorigenesis in vivo.

The correlation of RACK1 O-GlcNAcylation with tumor progression and relapse were analyzed in clinical HCC samples.

PARAGRAPH

We found that ribosomal RACK1 was highly modified by O-GlcNAc at Ser122.

O-GlcNAcylation of RACK1 enhanced its protein stability, ribosome binding and interaction with PKCβII (PRKCB), leading to increased eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E phosphorylation and translation of potent oncogenes in HCC cells.

Genetic ablation of RACK1 O-GlcNAcylation at Ser122 dramatically suppressed tumorigenesis, angiogenesis, and metastasis in vitro and in diethylnitrosamine (DEN)-induced HCC mouse model.

Increased RACK1 O-GlcNAcylation was also observed in HCC patient samples and correlated with tumor development and recurrence after chemotherapy.

PARAGRAPH

These findings demonstrate that RACK1 acts as key mediator linking O-GlcNAc metabolism to cap-dependent translation during HCC tumorigenesis.

Targeting RACK1 O-GlcNAcylation provides promising options for HCC treatment.

