10.1016/j.jhep.2019.01.021

ABSTRACT

TITLE

The non-transcriptional activity of IRF3 modulates hepatic immune cell populations in acute-on-chronic ethanol administration in mice

PARAGRAPH

Interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) is a transcription factor mediating antiviral responses, yet recent evidence indicates that IRF3 also has critical non-transcriptional functions, including activating RIG-I-like receptors-induced IRF-3-mediated pathway of apoptosis (RIPA) and restricting activity of NF-κB.

Using a novel murine model expressing only non-transcriptional IRF3 activity (Irf3S1/S1), we tested the hypothesis that non-transcriptional functions of IRF3 modulate innate immune responses in the Gao-binge (acute-on-chronic) model of alcohol-related liver disease.

PARAGRAPH

IRF3 and IRF3-mediated signals were analysed in liver samples from 5 patients transplanted for alcoholic hepatitis and 5 healthy controls.

C57BL/6, Irf3−/− and Irf3S1/S1 mice were exposed to Gao-binge ethanol-induced liver injury.

IRF3-mediated RIPA was investigated in cultured macrophages.

PARAGRAPH

Phospho-IRF3 and IRF3-mediated signals were elevated in livers of patients with alcoholic hepatitis.

In C57BL/6 mice, Gao-binge ethanol exposure activated IRF3 signaling and resulted in hepatocellular injury.

Indicators of liver injury were differentially impacted by Irf3 genotype.

Irf3−/−, but not Irf3S1/S1, mice were protected from steatosis, elevated alanine/aspartate aminotransferase levels and inflammatory cytokine expression.

In contrast, neutrophil accumulation and endoplasmic reticulum stress were independent of genotype.

Protection from Gao-binge injury in Irf3−/− mice was associated with an increased ratio of Ly6Clow (restorative) to Ly6Chigh (inflammatory) cells compared to C57BL/6 and Irf3S1/S1 mice.

Reduced ratios of Ly6Clow/Ly6Chigh in C57BL/6 and Irf3S1/S1 mice were associated with increased apoptosis in the Ly6Clow population in response to Gao-binge.

Activation of primary macrophage cultures with Poly (I:C) induced translocation of IRF3 to the mitochondria, where it associated with Bax and activated caspases 3 and 9, processes indicative of activation of the RIPA pathway.

PARAGRAPH

Taken together, these data identify that the non-transcriptional function of IRF3 plays an important role in modulating the innate immune environment in response to Gao-binge ethanol exposure, via regulation of immune cell apoptosis.

