10.1016/j.jhep.2019.02.018

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Response to direct-acting antiviral therapy among ongoing drug users and people receiving opioid substitution therapy

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

The epidemic of hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection has been driven in many countries by parenteral transmission through shared needles among people who inject drugs (PWID).1,2

Some reports have found that many PWID have a high willingness to receive HCV treatment.3,4

However, treatment uptake in the interferon era among PWID was very low, with about 1–2% of all HCV-infected PWID treated yearly.5,6

Most probably, this low incorporation of PWID to HCV treatment was due to barriers at different levels, including the poor tolerability of interferon.

Simple, highly effective and safer all-oral direct-acting antivirals (DAAs) should have increased the uptake of HCV treatment among PWID.

Indeed, current guidelines support the need to scale up treatment in PWID to effectively impact the HCV epidemic.7,8

However, patients with ongoing drug use or on opioid agonist therapy (OAT) are ineligible in some settings9 or might not be considered suitable to receive DAAs by some practitioners.10

To further complicate the scenario, PWID with HCV infection have been underrepresented in most clinical trials with DAAs.11–14

Indeed, only a few trials have specifically assessed treatment with all-oral DAA regimens in individuals on OAT.15–18

PARAGRAPH

In real-world conditions, the efficacy of DAAs may be lower, there may be more frequent severe adverse events, and there may be a higher rate of loss to follow-up and reinfection than in clinical trials.

In a large study of people receiving stable OAT and DAA therapy, approximately two-thirds of PWID on stable OAT used illicit drugs before and during treatment with DAA combinations.16,18

Due to concerns regarding the impact of ongoing drug use on adherence, response to therapy, and potential for reinfection, there are some clinicians who may not offer DAA therapy to people with ongoing drug use.19

Moreover, the DAA efficacy reported in patients on OAT, based on trials with specific programs to supervise and enhance adherence, may not be generalizable to other people using drugs in the real-world setting.15–17

Supervision of adherence within some clinical trials using electronic devices17,18 or dedicated health care professionals to follow patients day by day16,17 is ideal but not available nor reimbursed in most settings.

Therefore, real-world studies assessing the efficacy of currently used HCV therapy in PWID on OAT are required.

In the present study, we compared the rates of sustained virologic response (SVR) to interferon-free DAA combinations among individuals receiving or not receiving OAT in routine clinical practice.

SECTION

Patients and methods

SECTION

Design and patients

PARAGRAPH

This was a prospective multicohort study of HCV-infected patients who started DAA combinations in 33 Infectious Diseases Units in Spain and who were recruited at the HEPAVIR-DAA cohort (NCT02057003) or at the GEHEP-MONO cohort (NCT02333292).

The HEPAVIR-DAA cohort, which includes HIV/HCV-coinfected patients, and the GEHEP-MONO cohort, which recruits HCV-monoinfected individuals, are ongoing prospective multicenter cohorts of patients receiving DAA combinations prescribed in clinical practice.

Patients included in both cohorts were managed within the same Infectious Diseases Units, regardless of HIV or drug use status.

Patients were referred from primary care settings, including drug addiction clinics, to Infectious Diseases Units for HCV treatment.

Patients were managed in a specialized setting that is separated from OAT programs.

PARAGRAPH

All patients included in these cohorts who fulfilled the following criteria were included in the present analysis: i) Chronic HCV infection by any genotype; ii) Treatment with interferon-free DAA combination; iii) To have reached the scheduled date for SVR12 assessment.

SECTION

Medications and follow-up

PARAGRAPH

The first interferon-free DAA combinations were introduced in the cohorts in 2013.

Since then, sofosbuvir (SOF) plus ribavirin (RBV), SOF plus daclastavir (DCV) with or without RBV, SOF plus simeprevir (SMV) with or without RBV, SOF/ledipasvir (LDV) with or without RBV, paritaprevir-ritonavir/ombitasvir plus dasabuvir (PrOD) with or without RBV, and paritaprevir-ritonavir/ombitasvir (PrO) with RBV and elbasvir/grazoprevir (EBR/GZR) have been prescribed in the Units participating in the cohorts.

For the present analysis, patients treated with a SOF plus RBV regimen were excluded.

The SOF plus RBV combination was excluded because it yields suboptimal responses, particularly in genotype 3 infections, which are more frequently found in PWIDs.

PARAGRAPH

Patients were evaluated before starting therapy to assess whether they were candidates for treatment.

A specific Plan for Tackling Hepatitis C in Spain, launched in 2015, stated that all patients with chronic hepatitis C must be considered candidates for antiviral treatment.20

Some situations were considered as top-priority groups, among them those with a high risk of transmission, as recent or active drug users.

PARAGRAPH

The DAA regimen was chosen based on the availability of DAAs, concomitant medications and comorbidities, and guidelines in force in Spain.21

The caring physician took the final decision on individual DAA regimens.

During treatment, patients were evaluated at baseline, the date of starting therapy, at week 4 and at the date of completing treatment.

SVR was defined as plasma HCV RNA below the limit of detection 12 weeks after treatment completion.

Afterwards, patients were evaluated at 24 weeks.

PARAGRAPH

We considered as PWID all individuals with current or former injecting drug use.

People with a history of injecting drug use (reported injecting drug use ever), people with recent drug use at the time of treatment commencement (in the previous 12 months), and people with ongoing drug use (reported injecting or non-injecting drug use during treatment) were identified by retrospective chart review of databases, clinical records and laboratory records.

Ongoing drug use was determined by self-report at clinical visits or through positive urine drug testing.

Individuals using cannabis alone were not classified as active drug users.

OAT is managed by drug addiction facilities in Spain.

Data on OAT use among patients included in the cohorts is prospectively recorded.

SECTION

Laboratory determinations

PARAGRAPH

Among patients with reemergence of HCV viremia after the completion of therapy, the NS5B polymerase, NS3 protease and/or NS5A protein were Sanger sequenced using assays developed in house22 on samples both at failure and baseline time points, where available.

To discriminate reinfection from relapse we used at least 2 regions from HCV genome, and if reinfection by a different genotype was observed next-generation sequencing of the NS5B PCR product was performed on both samples to rule out mixed infection.

Reinfection was defined as a difference in HCV genotype or subtype, or as a significantly different clustering located in different clades in the phylogenetic tree; relapse was defined as significant clustering in the same clade using concatenated NS3-NS5A-NS5B, NS3-NS5A, NS3-NS5B or NS5A-NS5B sequences aligned by neighbor-joining and maximum-likelihood approaches.23

SECTION

Statistical analysis

PARAGRAPH

The primary outcome variable was SVR12 evaluated by intention-to-treat (ITT), considering all missing data at the date of SVR12 assessment as failures.

Secondary sensitivity analyses were carried out following a per protocol (PP) approach.

In the PP analysis, patients who voluntarily dropped-out or those with missing data were excluded.

PARAGRAPH

Continuous variables were expressed as median (Q1-Q3) and categorical variables as number (%).

The Chi-square test or the Fisher’s exact test, when appropriate, was used to compare proportions among treatment groups.

The 1-way ANOVA test or the Kruskal-Wallis test, whenever necessary, was applied for comparisons of continuous variables among groups.

A multivariate logistic regression was carried out to identify factors independently associated with SVR12.

Variables associated with SVR12 with a univariate p value ≤0.2, age categorized by 50 years and gender were entered into the model.

Data were analyzed using IBM SPSS 24.0 version (IBM Corporation, Somers, NY, USA) and STATA 9.0 (StataCorp LP, College Station, TX, USA).

SECTION

Ethics

PARAGRAPH

The study was designed and performed according to the Helsinki declaration and was approved by the local Ethics Committee.

All patients gave their written informed consent before being included in the cohorts.

PARAGRAPH

For further details regarding the materials used, please refer to the CTAT table.

SECTION

Results

SECTION

Baseline characteristics of the study population

PARAGRAPH

Overall, 1,752 patients included in the cohorts started interferon-free DAA combinations between June 2013 and March 2017.

Out of them, 818 (47%) participants reported no history of injecting drug use, 735 (42%) had a history of injecting drug use and were not receiving OAT and 199 (11%) had a history of injecting drug use and were receiving OAT (including methadone, n = 192; buprenorphine, n = 4; buprenorphine/naloxone, n = 3).

Among PWID, 11% (103 of 934) reported recent drug use (47 of 199 in those receiving OAT) and 0.9% (8 of 934) reported recent injecting drug use (8 of 199 in those receiving OAT).

The characteristics of the patients according to their history of injecting drug use and OAT at the date of starting DAA therapy are summarized in Table 1.

There were significant differences among the groups in factors including the frequency of HIV coinfection, HCV genotype distribution, pretreatment with peg-interferon plus ribavirin or the proportion of individuals with cirrhosis.

DAA combinations prescribed by group of patients are displayed in Table 2.

SECTION

Response to treatment

PARAGRAPH

In the ITT analysis, 93% (95% CI 91%–94%, n/N = 1,628/1,752) of patients achieved SVR12.

The SVR12 rate was 95% (95% CI 93%–96%, n/N = 778/818) among people without a history of injecting drug use, 92% (95% CI 89%–93%, n = 673/735) among PWID not receiving OAT and 89% (95% CI 83%–92%, n = 177/199) among PWID receiving OAT (p = 0.002, Fig. 1).

Both discontinuations of treatment due to adverse events and loss to follow-up were more frequent in the group of PWID receiving OAT (Fig. 1).

Fifty-three patients had viral relapse after the end of treatment response, 20 (38%) of them could be evaluated by phylogenetic analysis of samples at baseline and at the date of SVR12 evaluation.

Out of 52 relapses with the same HCV genotype, 17 of them were confirmed as relapses by phylogenetic analysis.

Three patients were classified as reinfections by phylogenetic analysis.

They were active drug users, who achieved SVR 4 weeks after the end of therapy and became reinfected by the date of SVR12.

One of them was reinfected by a different HCV genotype.

Virologic and non-virologic outcomes by study group are summarized in Table 2 and Table S1.

In the PP analysis, 97% (778 of 808) of patients that never injected drugs, 95% (673 of 708) of PWID not receiving OAT and 95% (178 of 188) of PWID receiving OAT achieved SVR12 (p = 0.246).

PARAGRAPH

Among 934 PWID evaluated in the study, we were able to gather information on drug use status during DAA treatment in 915 (96%) of them.

Eighty-six (9%) PWID used drugs during treatment, namely 42 (5.8%) PWID not receiving OAT and 44 (23%) PWID receiving OAT.

Baseline characteristics of patients with ongoing drug use are summarized in Table S2.

The rates of SVR12 for ongoing drug users were 79% (68 of 86) compared with 95% (1,548 of 1,632) for individuals without ongoing drug use during treatment (p <0.001).

Among the 86 ongoing drug users during treatment, 15 (17%) were lost-to-follow-up, there were no discontinuations due to adverse effects nor viral breakthrough.

The remaining 71 individuals reached end of treatment response and SVR4.

Afterwards, 3 (3.5%) of them were reinfected by the date of SVR12.

In the PP analysis, the proportion with SVR12 among people with ongoing drug use during treatment was 96% (68 of 71) compared with 96% (1,548 of 1,616) in individuals without ongoing drug use (p = 0.994).

Among individuals who reported recent drug use before starting DAAs, 80% (82 of 103) reached SVR12.

Fifteen (15%) were lost to follow-up, 3 (2.9%) relapsed and 3 (2.9%) were reinfected.

SECTION

Factors associated with response to treatment

PARAGRAPH

In the univariate analysis, ongoing drug use during treatment, HIV coinfection, HCV genotype 3 and cirrhosis were also associated with lower rates of SVR12 (Table 3).

In the multivariate analysis, adjusted for age and gender, ongoing drug use during treatment, HCV genotype 3, cirrhosis, and HIV coinfection were independent predictors of response (Table 3).

After controlling for other variables, PWID did not have a lower likelihood of SVR12, whether or not they received OAT (Table 3).

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

HCV-infected PWID, particularly active drug users, have a lower SVR12 rate to DAA combinations in clinical practice.

This fact is mainly attributable to higher rates of discontinuations due to adverse events and, especially, loss to follow-up, and not to virologic failure.

A number of key factors related with a lower likelihood of SVR are more frequently observed in PWIDs, but accounting for ongoing drug use during DAA therapy nearly closed the gap in SVR rates between the study groups.

PARAGRAPH

One of the barriers to DAA access is physicians, who are often reticent to prescribe DAAs to individuals with potentially ongoing drug use.10,19

In the EDGE CO-STAR trial, adherence to EBR/GRZ was similar to that in other interferon-free DAA trials in the general HCV population, which excluded patients with active drug use.16

However, the intensive adherence monitoring in the EDGE CO-STAR is hard to transfer to clinical practice in a real-world setting.

In the present study, PWID with and without OAT, who were outside a specific adherence program, achieved high SVR rates.

The frequency of loss to follow-up was small for PWID, but higher than for patients who never injected drugs.

Moreover, early discontinuations and loss to follow-up in PWIDs had an impact on the overall response in the present study.

In the present study, the response results among PWIDs on OAT are mostly in agreement with other real-world studies.

Among people receiving OAT treated with DAA combinations in clinical practice, SVR was 84%–100%.17

In a recent analysis of the German Hepatitis C registry, the ITT SVR rate was lower among people receiving OAT than those not receiving OAT, namely 85% vs. 91%.24

This lower response was mainly driven by a higher frequency of loss to follow-up in those receiving OAT.

Thus, as in the herein reported study, the PP analysis yielded similar SVR rates for those with and without OAT.24

Among PWID, with and without recent drug use, real-world studies of DAA therapy have demonstrated SVR rates of 80%–96%, which are in agreement with our results.

Again, the majority of non-response occurred as a result of loss to follow-up.

Therefore, the present study and previous study results suggest that practical strategies to enhance treatment retention among PWIDs are needed, given that some approaches followed in clinical trials are difficult to implement in daily practice.

The potential strategies include: providing OAT and DAA therapy at the same institutions, which has demonstrated better results in the German Hepatitis C registry;24 peer support or patient navigators,25 which are alternatives if OAT and DAA treatment cannot be provided at the same location; cash incentives, which may improve linkage to care and treatment outcomes.26

PARAGRAPH

Active drug use during treatment was frequently observed in the study cohorts.

One-fourth of PWID on OAT and 6% of PWID not on OAT reported being active drug users.

In a trial in patients on OAT, more than 50% of the participants had positive results in urinary drug screening.16

The proportion of patients on OAT identified as active drug users in the present study is lower than that found in the EDGE CO-STAR trial.

This finding is likely due to an underestimation of active drug use in our study.

In spite of this, an analysis that did not include patients with drug use during therapy, identified by review of archived records, increased the SVR rates of PWID groups.

In fact, similar SVR rates were found among patients who never injected drugs and PWID, receiving or not receiving OAT, in analyses that did not include individuals with current drug use.

Additionally, PWID status was not associated with lower SVR likelihood after adjustment for drug use during treatment with DAAs in the multivariate analysis.

As a consequence, interventions to improve adherence to DAAs in PWID at risk of drug use recurrence are needed in real-world settings.

PARAGRAPH

We found that some expected baseline factors, such as cirrhosis and HCV genotype 3, were associated with SVR.

In addition, we found that HIV coinfection was related to lower SVR rates.

We have reported this association before27 and a lower rate of SVR has been found in patients with lower CD4 cell count.28

Herein, we confirm our previous results in a larger study, after considering the use of drugs and inclusion in OAT programs.

Some experts, based on the results of DAA trials, have considered that HIV/HCV-coinfected patients should not be regarded as a “special population” or a “difficult to cure” group.29

However, DAA trial results may have limited generalizability, since the majority of HIV/HCV-coinfected individuals in real-world cohorts were not eligible to participate.11,30

Other authors have not found a negative effect of HIV coinfection on the response to DAAs in observational studies.28,31

However, as stated above, worse SVR rates among those with lower CD4 cell counts have recently been reported.32

Finally, treatment of acute HCV infection in HIV seropositive patients with short duration regimens, that are efficacious in HIV seronegative individuals, yields suboptimal SVR rates.33,34

Therefore, DAA treatment in HIV/HCV-coinfected patients should be managed conservatively, offering them DAA regimens with high proven efficacy in HIV/HCV coinfection.

PARAGRAPH

This study may have some limitations.

First, illicit drug use during DAA was retrospectively assessed.

Thus, an underestimation of drug use during treatment is likely.

Most probably, we classified as ongoing drug users those with a more disruptive behavior, with more frequent and problematic drug use.

Importantly, these people with more problematic drug use may be more likely to skip appointments and abandon follow-up.

Second, there were large differences in strong predictors of SVR among patients who never injected drugs and PWIDs.

These differences could explain the lower rates of SVR among PWIDs.

However, we found that SVR rates were similar among groups in PP analyses, which means that differences in response were mainly because of DAA discontinuations due to adverse effects and loss to follow-up.

In addition, an analysis restricted to patients without active drug use during treatment gave similar results.

Third, reinfections were not systematically evaluated in patients with relapse and reinfections should have been regarded as treatment successes.

Because of this, reinfections might have gone unnoticed in the study population.

This might have underestimated the SVR rate, particularly among patients with ongoing drug use.

However, the period of observation after the end of treatment was limited to 12 weeks and most patients were not engaged in ongoing risk behaviors, we assume that most recurrences must have been true relapses, rather than reinfections.

In addition, as stated above, lower rates of SVR among patients on OAT were due to a higher rate of discontinuations, rather than to relapses.

Fourth, the PWID without OAT group comprised both abstinent drug users and ongoing drug users not engaged in OAT programs.

The latter are a set of patients that could be harder to treat, and that might lower SVR results in the PWID without OAT group.

However, ongoing drug users represented a small proportion of PWID without OAT.

This study reports real-world results of interferon-free DAA efficacy in cohorts that included a large group of PWID, either receiving or not receiving OAT.

Our results lend support to the efficacy of all-oral DAA combinations for PWIDs on OAT found in clinical trials15,16 and generalize those results to a broader population managed with different DAA combinations, which is a strength of our study.

PARAGRAPH

In conclusion, HCV cure rates with interferon-free DAA combinations are high among PWID, either receiving or not receiving OAT.

However, the overall efficacy of DAAs in active drug users is lower, mainly because of loss to follow-up.

Thus, strategies targeting drug users to reduce their risk of abandoning follow-up are needed.

SECTION

Financial support

PARAGRAPH

This study was partly supported by grants from the Ministerio de Economía, Industria y competitividad, Instituto de Salud Carlos III (grants no: PI15/01607; PI15/00713, PI16/01443) and from Grupo de Estudio de Hepatitis Vírica-SEIMC (grants no: GEHEP-001 & GEHEP-004).

J.M. is the recipient of a grant from the Servicio Andaluz de Salud de la Junta de Andalucía (grant number B-0037).

J.A.P. is recipient of an intensification grant from the Instituto de Salud Carlos III (grant number Programa-I3SNS).

F.G. is recipient of an intensification grant from Consjeria de Salud, Junta de Andalucía.

This work has been partially funded by the RD12/0017/0012 and RD16/0025/0040 projects as part of the Plan Nacional R + D + I and cofinanced by ISCIII-Subdirección General de Evaluación, the Fondo Europeo de Desarrollo Regional (FEDER) and the Fondo de Investigaciones Sanitarias (grant no: PI15/01124).

SECTION

Conflict of interest

PARAGRAPH

JM has been an investigator in clinical trials supported by Bristol-Myers Squibb, Gilead and Merck Sharp & Dome.

He has received lectures fees from Gilead, Bristol-Myers Squibb, and Merck Sharp & Dome, and consulting fees from Bristol-Myers-Squibb, Gilead, and Merck Sharp & Dome.

JAP reports having received consulting fees from Bristol-Myers Squibb, Abbvie, Gilead, Merck Sharp & Dome, and Janssen Cilag.

He has received research support from Bristol-Myers Squibb, Abbvie and Gilead and has received lecture fees from Abbvie, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Janssen Cilag, and Gilead.

DM has received lectures fees from Abbvie, Gilead, ViiV Healthcare, Janssen Cilag, and Merck Sharp & Dome, and consulting fees from Janssen Cilag.

The remaining authors report no conflict of interest.

SECTION

Authors’ contributions

PARAGRAPH

Juan Macías: Study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, writing and reviewing the paper.

Luis E. Morano: Data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, reviewing the paper.

Francisco Téllez: Data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, reviewing the paper.

Rafael Granados: Data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, reviewing the paper.

Antonio Rivero-Juárez: Data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, reviewing the paper.

Rosario Palacios: Data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, reviewing the paper.

MªJosé Ríos: Data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, reviewing the paper.

Dolores Merino: Data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, reviewing the paper.

Montserrat Pérez-Pérez: Data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, reviewing the paper.

Antonio Collado: Data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, reviewing the paper.

Blanca Figueruela: Data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, reviewing the paper.

Aitana Morano: Data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, reviewing the paper.

Carolina Freyre-Carrillo: Data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, reviewing the paper.

José M. Martin: Data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, reviewing the paper.

Antonio Rivero: Data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, reviewing the paper.

Federico García: Phylogenetic analysis, data interpretation, writing and reviewing the paper.

Juan A. Pineda: Study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, writing and reviewing the paper.