10.1016/j.jhep.2018.11.003

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Functional and immunogenic characterization of diverse HCV glycoprotein E2 variants

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is a global health burden affecting approximately 71 million people worldwide.1

Infection often leads to chronic hepatitis, with the subsequent risk of liver cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma.

Persistent HCV infection is now curable with the introduction of direct-acting antivirals.

However, a prophylactic HCV vaccine is not available.

Since viral re-infection is possible and as many HCV infected individuals are not diagnosed, a vaccine against HCV would facilitate global HCV eradication programs.

PARAGRAPH

The extreme diversity of HCV is a major obstacle for vaccine development.2

The HCV E1E2 proteins are essential for viral cell entry, they bind the HCV receptor CD81 and they are targets for neutralizing antibodies.

Hence, immunogens based on E1E2 represent a major branch of vaccine development3,4 and numerous approaches to induce broadly neutralizing antibodies (bNabs) that target E1E2 have been explored.5

For recombinant E1E2, the most advanced HCV subunit vaccine candidate, induction of robust cross-binding and cross-neutralizing antibody responses was observed in multiple animal models and in humans.4,6–8

PARAGRAPH

HCV has evolved mechanisms to evade humoral immune responses including high functional flexibility and variability of immunogenic portions of its envelope proteins.9

The highest sequence variability occurs in the first 27 amino acids of the N-terminus of E2, which is referred to as the hypervariable region 1 (HVR1), and which is dispensable for HCV infection in vitro.10,11

The HVR1 is immunogenic and most patients mount antibodies targeting this region.12

However, these antibodies rapidly select resistant viral variants.13

Deletion of the HVR1 renders HCV more susceptible to antibody neutralization, and it increases virus binding to soluble CD81, suggesting that this region occludes key neutralization epitopes and the viral CD81 binding site.10,11

HCV E1E2 heterodimers are also heavily glycosylated at multiple sites within both E1 and E2, with glycans modulating glycoprotein function and antibody neutralization.14–16

Structural analyses of the E2 core domain show that the conserved CD81 binding site is surrounded by several glycosylation sites and that it overlaps with the epitopes of bNabs isolated from patients, such as HC1 and HC11.17–20

(Fig. 1).

Strikingly, in vitro HCV is unable to escape antibody pressure by HC1 and HC11 suggesting that immune responses targeting these epitopes may confer robust protection.21,22

PARAGRAPH

We hypothesized that the HVR1 and protein glycosylation limits access to these conserved viral epitopes.

In turn, immunogenicity of these epitopes may be low and antibodies targeting these viral regions may arise only very infrequently.

To overcome this limitation and to focus immune responses on conserved viral epitopes we combined targeted protein deglycosylation with deletion of HVR1 to create viruses and proteins with increased exposure of the crucial CD81 binding site and possibly superior immunogenicity.

SECTION

Materials and methods

SECTION

Plasmid constructs

PARAGRAPH

The renilla-luciferase harboring Jc123 and Jc1-ΔHVR110 viral cDNA clones with or without alanine substitutions within N-linked glycosylation sites of E2 (N417A, N423A, N448A, N534A and N649A) were constructed by standard PCR-based techniques and verified by sequencing.

SECTION

HCV cell culture neutralization assay

PARAGRAPH

For inhibition of HCV infection, 200 μl of a Huh-7.5 cell suspension (5 × 104 cells per ml) was seeded into each well of a 96-well plate 24 h prior to inoculation.

Luciferase reporter viruses were mixed with serial dilutions of indicated serum/antibody concentrations and pre-incubated for 1 h.

This mixture was used to inoculate cells for 4 h in triplicates per dilution.

Thereafter, 170 µl of DMEM was added onto the cells.

Viral infection was determined 48 or 72 h after infection by removing the supernatant and lysing cells by adding passive lysis buffer or water, before measuring relative light units using a 96-well plate reader (Berthold).

SECTION

HCV pseudotyped virus neutralization assay

PARAGRAPH

HCV pseudotyped viruses (HCVpp) expressing a luciferase reporter were generated as described.35

For neutralization assays, Huh-7.5 cells were plated on polylysine coated 96-well plates 1 day prior to infection.

HCVpp were diluted 1:10 and premixed with heat inactivated diluted sera (1:100) for 1 h at 37 °C, before being added to Huh-7.5 cells.

The antibody-virus inoculum was replaced with fresh culture medium 6 h post-infection.

Cells were processed 48 h post-infection using the Bright-glo luciferase assay system (Promega, Madison, WI, USA).

Luminescence was measured using an Enspire plate reader (Perkin-Elmer, Waltham, MA, USA).

The neutralization activity was calculated using the following formula: % neutralization = (pre-post)/pre × 100, where pre/post represent the luciferase activity after incubating with either the pre- or post-vaccination sera.

SECTION

Molecular modeling

PARAGRAPH

Modeling of the glycosylated core structure (PDB 4MWF) was performed using Glycoprotein Builder (www.glycam.org).

Glycans are depicted as wireframes; protein as a surface.

The predicted CD81 binding site and monoclonal antibody (mAb) HC1/HC11 epitopes (highlighted in green) were annotated using UCSF Chimera (www.cgl.ucsf.edu/chimera) using a space fill model.

Other amino acid side chains were colored by hydrophobicity (red = hydrophobic; blue = hydrophilic as determined by the Kyte-Doolittle scale).

SECTION

Results

SECTION

Inactivation of glycosylation sites and deletion of HVR1 increase exposure of conserved neutralization epitopes and the CD81 binding site

PARAGRAPH

To generate an improved HCV vaccine antigen, we aimed to increase the exposure of the CD81-binding site by combined mutation of the HVR1 and selected glycosylation sites.

Jc1 reporter viruses expressing the J6 (genotype 2a [GT2a]) E1E2 proteins23,24 were constructed harboring N to A substitutions at glycosylation sites N417 (417) (numbering according to the H77 reference stain; J6 numbering in brackets), N423 (423), N448 (448), N532 (534) and N645 (649) (Fig. 1A).

A previous report had shown that mutations at these residues still allowed viral entry of JFH1 and can therefore be studied and further evaluated in vitro.15

Molecular modeling of the glycans associated with the HCV E2 core structure revealed that some were proximal to the CD81 binding site and conserved neutralization epitopes (Fig. 1B).

Therefore, to further increase exposure of the CD81 binding site, we combined these mutations with the deletion of the HVR1.

Fitness of mutant viruses was examined by transfection of Huh7-Lunet N#3 cells that do not express CD81,25 and therefore do not permit re-infection of the cells.

Replication of all viral mutants was comparable to wild-type (WT) Jc1 (Fig. 1C).

Huh-7.5 cells were inoculated with virus stocks after normalization to viral core protein, which acts as a marker for virus particle release.

In line with our previous report,10 deletion of HVR1 resulted in a 5-fold reduction of specific infectivity of Jc1 (Fig. 1D).

Likewise, point mutations of individual glycosylation sites were well tolerated as specific infectivity was unaffected or at most reduced by ca. 5-fold.

PARAGRAPH

To examine the impact of these mutations on the exposure of conserved neutralization epitopes within the CD81 binding site, we used the soluble, large-extracellular loop of CD81 (CD81-LEL) and 2 potent bNabs (HC1 and HC11) that target the CD81 binding site,17–21 for precipitation of the indicated viral mutants (Fig. 2A and B).

Deglycosylation of specific residues in the parental Jc1 virus slightly increased binding of HC1 in particular for mutant N448A and N534A, as demonstrated by enhanced core protein precipitation compared to Jc1, without being statistically significant (Fig. 2A).

However, the deletion of HVR1 significantly enhanced precipitation by this antibody, which did not further increase by additional point mutations of glycosylation sites at indicated positions (Fig. 2A).

Similar results were observed when the HC11 antibody was used: mutation of individual glycosylation sites increased antibody binding (e.g. N423A, N448A).

Deletion of HVR1 had the greatest effect, which was not further boosted by mutation of the glycosylation sites (Fig. 2B).

Comparable results were obtained when we used CD81-LEL for precipitation.

In the context of parental Jc1, inactivation of individual glycosylation sites modestly increased precipitation (Fig. 2C).

As may be expected from the available structural information (Fig. 1B),17,18 the effect was greatest for mutants N423A and N534A, as these glycosylation sites are directly adjacent to the CD81 binding site.

Deletion of HVR1 had the greatest effect and precipitation of viruses lacking HVR1 was not further boosted by deglycosylation of specific residues.

SECTION

Deletion of HVR1 and glycosylation sites enhances virus neutralization

PARAGRAPH

To characterize the accessibility of HCV antibody epitopes, we performed neutralization assays with a panel of bNAbs (Fig. 3A and C and Table S1).

Moreover, we quantified viral neutralization by CD81-LEL (Fig. 3B and C and Table S1).

Dose dependence of neutralization for selected viruses is displayed in Fig. 3C. Radar plots indicating the inhibitory concentration 90% (IC90) of different antibodies or the CD81-LEL against parental HCV and all mutant viruses are displayed in Fig. 3A and 3B.

In Fig. 3A, each plot shows a specific virus and its sensitivity towards given antibodies, whereas Fig. 3B highlights the susceptibility of each virus to competition by CD81-LEL.

In the context of parental Jc1, deletion of glycans at position N423 and N448 increased the susceptibility to all tested antibodies, whereas removal of glycosylation at residues N417, N534, and N649 had little effect (Fig. 3A upper panels).

As expected, deletion of HVR1 enhanced neutralization by all antibodies tested.

Combination of deletion of HVR1 with deletion of specific N-glycosylation sites modified neutralization by these antibodies, and the Jc1-ΔHVR1-N534A mutant exhibited an enhanced susceptibility to neutralization by HC1 and HC11 (Fig. 3A and 3C).

Removal of glycosylation at the N423, N534, and N417 site in the context of WT Jc1 enhanced inhibition of infection by CD81-LEL, whereas mutation of the N448 and N649 sites had no effect (Fig. 3B).

Deletion of HVR1 increased neutralization by CD81-LEL and this was further enhanced ca. 5–10-fold by addition of the N534 mutation.

Therefore, combined deletion of HVR1 and inactivation of glycosylation site N534 enhanced antibody and CD81 binding to virus particles and it had the most drastic effect on neutralization by bNabs and soluble CD81.

PARAGRAPH

Next, we evaluated neutralization of Jc1, Jc1-N534A, Jc1-ΔHVR1 and Jc1-ΔHVR1-N534A by sera from individuals chronically infected with HCV GT1 and GT2 (Fig. 4A-C).

Like the results of neutralization with monoclonal antibodies and CD81-LEL (Fig. 3), the sera poorly neutralized Jc1.

Neutralization was enhanced by elimination of the N534 site in Jc1, further boosted by deletion of HVR1, and it was maximal when the deletion of HVR1 was combined with the inactivation of the N534 glycosylation site with minor interpatient variation, independent of the patients’ HCV GT (Fig. 4A-C).

Thus, deletion of HVR1 together with inactivation of glycosylation site N534 enhanced antibody and CD81 binding to virus particles.

As well, this had the most drastic effect on neutralization by bNabs, soluble CD81 and patient sera.

As these viruses are infectious, they present well-folded and functional viral envelope proteins that display conserved epitopes in a more accessible manner.

Thus, envelope proteins carrying these modifications, particularly the deletion of HVR1 combined with the N534A mutation, may constitute good candidates for focusing antibody responses on conserved viral epitopes.

SECTION

Immunogenicity of recombinant E2 proteins with and without HVR1 and glycosylation

PARAGRAPH

To test the immunogenicity of recombinant E2 proteins, with and without HVR1 and glycosylation, we prepared soluble, truncated HCV J6 E2 protein variants in 293T cells and immunized BALB/c mice.

These proteins have previously been reported to inhibit viral infection, indicating that they are properly folded.26

Fig. S1 shows the immunization scheme.

Briefly, animals received 30 µg of soluble E2 injected together with bis-(3′,5′)-cyclic dimeric adenosine monophosphate (c-di-AMP) as adjuvant and were boosted 3 times with the same formulation.

Control animals were vaccinated with PBS and adjuvant only.

We also used 2 vaccination series where we changed antigens in each boost in order to promote the stimulation of antibodies specific for the conserved epitopes.

In sequence A animals were primed using WT J6 E2 (GT2a), followed by 3 boosters with E2ΔHVR1 (J6 GT2a derivative), E2ΔHVR1/N534A (J6 GT2a derivative), and WT Con1 E2 (GT1b), respectively.

In sequence B mice were primed with E2ΔHVR1/N534A, followed by 3 booster immunizations with E2ΔHVR1 (J6 GT2a derivative), WT Con1 (GT1b) E2, and WT J6 (GT2a) E2, respectively.

Finally, to examine the relevance of global glycosylation for antigenicity, we vaccinated with WT J6 (GT2a) or with J6 (GT2a) E2ΔHVR1 that had been deglycosylated by PNGaseF treatment prior to vaccination.

PARAGRAPH

The binding of vaccine-induced antibodies to 293T cell-derived recombinant E2 proteins or E1-E2 heterodimers from HCV infected cells was determined by ELISA (Fig. 5 and Fig. S2).

Fig. 5A shows endpoint titers of sera from vaccinated animals reacting with H77 (GT1a), Con1 (GT1b), J6 (GT2a) or J6ΔHVR1 (GT2a) recombinant proteins.

High binding titers across these GT1 and GT2 antigens were observed in all vaccinated groups up to a maximal endpoint dilution approaching 10E6 (Fig. 5A).

Moreover, irrespective of which protein was used for vaccination, most of these antibodies targeted binding sites outside of the HVR1, as endpoint titers were comparable between J6 (GT2a) and J6ΔHVR1 (GT2a) ELISA antigens.

Cross-binding activity to these recombinant E2 proteins was clearly enhanced for vaccination with E2ΔHVR compared to WT recombinant E2 (Fig. 5C top panel).

Moreover, vaccination according to sequence A and B resulted in greater cross-binding to recombinant E2 proteins.

To evaluate the binding of these antibodies to heterodimeric E1-E2 protein complexes from different HCV strains, we used plates coated with galanthus nivalis lectin to capture HCV E1E2 complexes expressed in Huh-7.5 cells transfected with infectious HCV cell culture (HCVcc) chimeras.

Subsequently, these plates were incubated with sera from our vaccinated animals and endpoint binding titers were calculated (Fig. 5B).

In each group of vaccinated animals, anti-E2 antibodies binding to all examined E1-E2 protein complexes were detectable.

Thus, each vaccination approach induced broadly cross-binding antibodies that recognize E2 proteins of all major HCV GTs.

With the exception of the vaccination with J6ΔHVR-534 E2 protein, however, all vaccination approaches induced antibodies with cross-binding activity to these E1-E2 heterodimers indistinguishable from the ones induced by parental J6 E2 (Fig. 5B and 5C bottom panel).

Taken together, all vaccination approaches induced strong cross-binding antibodies to E2 and E1-E2 heterodimers.

Vaccination with different E2 proteins, most notably with E2ΔHVR1, enhanced cross-binding when judged by ELISAs involving recombinant E2.

However, this difference was not detected when cross-binding was quantified with ELISAs based on E1-E2 heterodimers from cells replicating infectious virus.

SECTION

Evaluation of neutralizing activity of vaccine-induced antibodies

PARAGRAPH

To examine autologous virus and virus cross-neutralizing responses we incubated Jc1 and GT5a reporter viruses, respectively, with increasing doses of purified IgG from vaccinated animals or from patient sera (Fig. 6A).

The autologous virus Jc1 was neutralized by antibodies from the animals vaccinated with deglycosylated E2, with deglycosylated ΔHVR1 or the series A antigen combinations.

The strength of these autologous neutralizing antibody responses was at least as strong as the neutralization by polyclonal human antibodies collected from a panel of GT1, 2 and 3 chronically infected individuals.

This correlated with comparable binding of patient-derived and vaccine-induced antibodies to recombinant E2 and virus particle associated E2, quantified by surface plasmon resonance and virus particle precipitation (Fig. S4).

However, none of the vaccine-induced antibodies were able to cross-neutralize the GT5a reporter virus which was at least partially neutralized by the majority of patient-derived antibodies.

PARAGRAPH

It has been reported that HCV induces antibodies that bind to E2 and that interfere with the activity of neutralizing antibodies, thereby masking vaccine-induced antibody neutralization.27,28

To explore whether our vaccine candidates induced such interfering antibodies, we used pooled polyclonal mouse IgGs from each vaccinated group and mixed them with polyclonal IgGs from a patient that displays strong neutralizing activity.

The neutralization efficacy was not decreased by addition of IgG vaccinated mice, suggesting that the vaccines did not induce antibodies interfering with neutralization (Fig. 6B).

PARAGRAPH

The role of glycans and the HVR1 for immunogenicity was also assessed using protein from a different HCV GT (GT1a H77), as well as in the context of E1E2 heterodimers purified from Chinese hamster ovary cell extracts.

A detailed description of the purification procedure is provided in the materials and methods section and the quality control of the purification is provided (Fig. S5A).

The binding of E1E2 (WT), E1E2 (N417Q) and E1E2 (N532Q) antigens to CD81-LEL was examined by ELISA and revealed enhanced binding for E1E2 (N532Q) compared to parental E1E2 and the N417Q mutant (Fig. 7A and Fig. S5B).

These GT1a antigens were used to immunize mice resulting in the induction of E2 specific antibody responses, which were similar between all groups (Fig. 7B).

All 3 vaccine candidates induced antibodies competing with binding of the known monoclonal antibodies AR3B, 1:7, HC33.4 and AP33 as assessed by a competition assay (Fig. 7C).

Finally, we used GT1a H77 HCVpp assays to examine the neutralization efficacy of vaccine-induced antibodies.

Each vaccine candidate induced HCVpp neutralizing antibodies, with no significant differences between the vaccine candidates were observed (Fig. 7D).

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

Here we provide a high-resolution map of viral determinants that govern exposure of the CD81 binding site and of conserved neutralization epitopes.

We show that these changes are well tolerated indicating that they do not abrogate the functioning of E1/E2.

The most global change in antibody binding/neutralization and CD81 binding/neutralization was accomplished by deletion of HVR1 combined with inactivation of glycosylation site 534.

Thus, we chose this combined modification for vaccination approaches involving recombinant proteins.

To rule out strain-specific differences between immunogens, we created these variants in the background of J6 (GT2a) E2 and in the context of the H77 (GT1a) strain.

We prepared H77 E1E2 heterodimers from Chinese hamster ovary cell extracts and recombinant E2 protein secreted from 293T cells to examine the importance of producer cells and the relevance of E1.

To globally assess the relevance of glycosylation in our vaccine candidates we also examined the immunogenicity of 293T cell-derived proteins that had been enzymatically deglycosylated prior to vaccination.

Finally, we included a vaccination protocol involving variable immunogens and, in each case, at least 1 immunogen from an alternative viral GT.

PARAGRAPH

All vaccination approaches induced robust cross-binding antibody responses as determined by ELISA assays involving recombinant proteins or cell extracts expressing E1-E2 heterodimers from all major HCV GTs (Fig. 5).

Vaccination with E1-E2 heterodimers induced antibodies that competed with the binding of previously described bNAbs AR3B, 1:7, HC33.4 and AP33 and we detected virus neutralization in HCVpp assays (Fig. 7).

However, inactivation of N417 or N532 glycosylation sites in the context of H77 E1E2 heterodimers did not grossly affect these responses although the N532Q mutation mediated increased binding of the recombinant E1E2 complex to CD81.

Among vaccinations with 293T-derived E2 proteins immunization with J6-E2ΔHVR1 and the immunization series A and B mounted superior cross-binding antibodies compared with J6-E2 and the other examined approaches.

However, this was only detected when recombinant E2 proteins from 293T cells were used as ELISA antigens and not when E1-E2 heterodimers partially purified from HCV replicating cells were employed.

Thus, some of our E2-protein based vaccination approaches successfully improved production of cross-binding antibodies to the recombinant immunogens but not to the E1-E2 heterodimer expressed in infected cells.

Thus, apparently there are structural differences between these proteins and E1-E2 heterodimers.

These differences could impact on vaccine efficacy and they should be considered when standardizing tests between laboratories and when estimating cross-binding between different studies.

It is also possible that such structural differences explain why vaccination with 293T-derived E2 proteins triggered only modest autologous neutralizing antibodies and no cross-neutralization.

It has been shown that purified, UV-inactivated HCVcc particles induce cross-neutralizing antibodies in mice and non-human primates.29,30

Thus, it will be interesting to explore if vaccination with the HCVcc variants characterized here induces a focused and enhanced neutralizing antibody response.

PARAGRAPH

It is surprising that vaccination with E2 from 293T cells induced very robust, cross-binding antibodies that, however, did not cross-neutralize.

One possible explanation was that these immunogens induced antibodies that interfere with cross-neutralization as has been described previously.27,28

However, the vaccine-induced antibodies did not interfere with cross-neutralization of HCV patient-derived polyclonal antibodies (Fig. 6).

Thus, we believe that the 293T-derived E2 vaccines examined here efficiently induced antibodies that target conserved binding epitopes, but that targeting these epitopes is not cross-neutralizing.

It is possible that this reflects in part a species-specific limitation of immunogenicity of recombinant E2 proteins in mice as recent results by other groups and us suggest that anti-HCV neutralizing antibody responses are more readily induced in guinea pigs.31,32

Although neutralizing antibodies were elicited, those were primarily strain-specific, thus explaining the neutralization of autologous Jc1 particles.

Notably, the conserved CD81 binding site seems to be structurally highly flexible, and it was proposed that this flexibility may favor induction of non-neutralizing antibodies.33

In line with this, it is possible that the recombinant E2 proteins used here preferentially adopt a conformation that induces binding but non-neutralizing antibodies.

Indeed, the conformation that induces neutralizing antibodies may be underrepresented in these recombinant proteins.

Thus, epitope exposure alone may be insufficient and should be complemented by vaccine design aiming at rigidifying this region.

PARAGRAPH

The lack of robust immunocompetent animal models permissive for HCV makes it hard to assess if the quantity and quality of vaccine-induced immunity is sufficient to confer protection.

Thus, it is difficult to predict to what extent antibody responses induced by current vaccination approaches, including those presented here, contribute to protection.

In vivo, antibodies could facilitate protection independently of direct virus particle neutralization.

For instance antibody dependent cytotoxicity may contribute to clearance of HCV infected cells.

In this regard, binding but non-neutralizing antibodies may contribute to HCV protection, as has recently been reported for an HIV infection in vivo.34

Therefore, development of vaccination approaches inducing strong T cell responses as well as nNAbs and bNAbs and involving all antibody effector functions is likely of key importance for induction of robust protection.

SECTION

Financial support

PARAGRAPH

Twincore is a joint venture of Hannover Medical School and the Helmholtz-Centre for infection research.

T.P. was supported by a grant from the DZIF (HCV-vaccine), and T.P. and C.A.G. were supported by the Helmholtz-Alberta Initiative for Infectious Disease Research (HAI-IDR).

SECTION

Conflict of interest

PARAGRAPH

The authors declare no conflicts of interest that pertain to this work.

PARAGRAPH

Please refer to the accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.

SECTION

Authors’ contributions

PARAGRAPH

Conceived and designed experiments: TKh, PB, DB, TP.

Performed the experiments: TKh, PB, DB, MD, KS, JL, ML, DH, JAJW, VMG.

Analysed the data: TKh, PB, DB, DT, RB, TP.

Contributed reagents/material/analysis tools: AWT, AVB, FK, LD, LJS, TKr, ES, AGK, JM, CAG, MH, US and MPM.

Wrote the manuscript: TKh, PB, DB, and TP.