10.1016/j.ebr.2019.100323

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Autistic features in Unverricht–Lundborg disease

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Unverricht–Lundborg disease is an autosomal recessive progressive myoclonus epilepsy characterized by onset at the age of 6–15 years, severe incapacitating stimulus-sensitive progressive myoclonus, tonic–clonic seizures, absence seizures and characteristic abnormalities in the electroencephalogram (EEG) [1–3].

Neuropsychiatric disturbances are a recognized feature of Unverricht–Lundborg disease [4].

However, autistic features have not recived much detail in these patients.

Autistic features may however be co-associated with epilepsy [5].

Hence, we studied three patients with this disease for autistic features along with other clinical features.

SECTION

Case series

PARAGRAPH

The study was conducted on patients with Unverricht–Lundborg disease who presented to Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences in Lucknow, India.

The patients were diagnosed due to myoclonic seizures triggered by loud noise and tactile stimulation along with ataxia and cognitive decline, electroencephalogram changes of intermittent transient slowing and generalized epileptiform discharges along with a normal MRI scan [6].

We applied the Children's Global Assessment Scale to assess the level of function in these patients [7].

Treatment included antiseizure drugs and comorbid symptom management.

The ages of the children ranged between 3 years and 15 years and the age at onset of seizures was between 1 year and 15 years.

Two patients had atonic seizures in addition to generalized tonic-clonic seizures (GTCS).

Triggers included flickering lights, movement and vibration in one patient and scolding in none of them.

Hyperactivity was present in two children and mental retardation was moderate in one and mild in the other two.

Children's Global Assessment Scale score was 35 in two of the children and 50 in one of them (range 1–90; high scores reflect better function).

Psychiatric features included running amok, wandering, inappropriate smiling, depression and violent behavior (Table 1).

Cranial nerve involvement (left facial palsy and decreased visual acuity) was present in one patient, and sensorineural hearing loss occurred in the other child.

All of them exhibited spasticity and hyperreflexia.

Fig. 1 shows EEG changes for one of the patients.

There was a partial response to antiseizure drugs in two patients and one of them responded poorly to treatment (Table 1).

Antiseizure drugs utilized included sodium valproate, zonisamide, clonazepam and levetiracetam.

GTCS were controlled in two of the patients and atonic and myoclonic seizures showed partial response to treatment.

PARAGRAPH

We suspected autism on the basis of absent eye contact, avoidance behavior and absence of attachment to their parents.

Subsequently, we assessed these children using the Childhood Autism Spectrum Test (CAST), which yielded a score of > 15 in all the three children (Table 2) [8].

Hence, they were classified as having autism.

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

In this study, the ages of children ranged between 3 years and 15 years and the age at the onset of seizures ranged between 1 year and 15 years consistent with previous studies [6].

Myoclonic seizures are a presenting symptom in most of the patients [9].

In the present study, myoclonic jerks were the first clinical feature in two patients.

Various stimuli like noise, light or touch may trigger myoclonic jerks in these patients [1,6,10].

Our patient's had myoclonus aggravated by flickering lights, movement and vibration as triggering factors in one patient and scolding in none of them.

We noted that vibration was able to trigger myoclonus.

This stimulus has not received attention as a trigger for myoclonus.

We found comorbidities of hyperactivity in two children, impaired function, and mental retardation and behavioral features in our cohort similar to prior reports [2–4,11].

Our patients had only a partial response to antiseizure drug treatment as expected in Unverricht–Lundborg disease [2].

PARAGRAPH

Autistic features seen in our patients are a new comorbidity that has not been detailed in the past to our knowledge.

This was severe in the diagnosis of autism as judged by the Childhood Autism Spectrum Test.

Hence, we recommend assessing autistic features in patients with Unverricht-Lundborg disease.

This may be an important comorbid clinical feature in patients with the disease and may also suggest a possible overlap between autism spectrum and other progressive myoclonus epilepsies.

Conversely, obtaiing a history of myoclonus in children who present with autism may help elucidate the diagnosis.

Further study involving more patients may help in defining the true incidence of autism in the Progessive Myoclonus epilepsies.