10.1016/j.jhep.2019.01.021

FULLTEXT

TITLE

The non-transcriptional activity of IRF3 modulates hepatic immune cell populations in acute-on-chronic ethanol administration in mice

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Alcohol consumption is a leading cause of preventable morbidity and mortality worldwide.1

The pathogenesis of alcohol-related liver disease (ALD) is initially characterized by steatosis, progressing in some individuals to fibrosis and cirrhosis.

Alcoholic hepatitis (AH), a severe inflammatory condition, with extensive infiltration of leukocytes and hepatocellular injury, can occur at any stage of disease progression; 28-day mortality rates range from 25–35%.1–2

The development of AH is a complex process involving both parenchymal and non-parenchymal cells resident in the liver, as well as the recruitment of immune cells to the liver in response to damage and inflammation.3

Current therapies, focusing on suppressing inflammation, are ineffective in many patients with severe AH and outcomes remain poor.4

PARAGRAPH

There is a growing appreciation of a dynamic and complex role of the innate immune system in the progression of ALD, as well as the resolution of hepatocellular injury.

Both fluid-phase elements, such as complement,5 and cellular components of the innate immune system contribute to progression and resolution of ethanol-induced liver injury.3

This dynamic interplay between injury and repair is mediated, at least in part, by the tremendous plasticity of resident tissue macrophages and infiltrating monocytes; the phenotype of these innate immune cells is rapidly modulated in response to signals within their microenvironment.6

Pathogen associated molecular patterns and damage associated molecular patterns are key signals of injury in ALD.3

Increased exposure of Kupffer cells, the resident hepatic macrophages, to gut-derived lipopolysaccharide (LPS) during chronic ethanol7 activates TLR4-dependent production of inflammatory mediators.3

In response to these initial inflammatory signals, circulating monocytes and neutrophils infiltrate the liver.3

Depending on the stage of injury/repair, infiltrating monocytes can acquire multiple phenotypes, exhibiting pro-inflammatory, anti-inflammatory and/or pro-resolution/remodeling activity.6

PARAGRAPH

The precise molecular mechanisms controlling the heterogeneity of innate immune cells in the liver in response to ethanol exposure is not well understood.

However, it is likely that regulation of recruitment and phenotypic maturation, as well as maintaining the appropriate balance between pro-survival and pro-death pathways is critical to the ability of innate immune cells to rapidly respond to the demands of maintaining liver homeostasis in the face of ethanol-induced injury.8

While there is a good understanding of how ethanol regulates the expression of chemokines and subsequent recruitment of immune cells to the liver,6 the potential mechanisms regulating immune cell death in the liver are particularly understudied.

PARAGRAPH

Interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) is an important regulator of antiviral activity.

Upon activation, IRF3 is phosphorylated and pIRF3 acts as a transcription factor essential for the induction of interferon-β (IFNβ) and antiviral genes.

Absence of these antiviral functions makes Irf3−/− mice susceptible to a wide range of viral infections.9

In addition to its transcriptional functions, IRF3 directly triggers a pro-apoptotic pathway, termed RIG-I-like receptors (RLR)-induced IRF-3-mediated pathway of apoptosis (RIPA) via a non-transcriptional mechanism.10

In RIPA, IRF3 is activated by linear ubiquitination on 2 lysine residues, resulting in the interaction of IRF3 with the pro-apoptotic protein Bax.

The IRF3/BAX complex then translocates to the mitochondria where it triggers apoptosis.10–11

PARAGRAPH

Recent data suggest that IRF3 plays a critical role in the progression of ALD,12–13 as well as non-alcoholic fatty liver disease/non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH)14,15 and fibrosis.16

However, it is not known if the transcriptional and/or non-transcriptional functions of IRF3 contribute to ethanol-induced liver injury.

Since regulated apoptosis is an important mechanism for the resolution of inflammation, we hypothesized that the exacerbated inflammatory responses to AH involve an inappropriate utilization of the IRF3-mediated RIPA pathway.

PARAGRAPH

To test this hypothesis, we exposed a novel knock-in mouse, in which the wild-type Irf3 was replaced by a mutant Irf3 gene encoding a protein lacking key phosphorylation sites (SS388/390AA) required for translocation of IRF3 to the nucleus,10,11 to the Gao-binge (acute-on-chronic) model of alcohol-related liver disease.

While Irf3−/− mice, lacking both the transcriptional and non-transcriptional functions of IRF3, exhibited robust neutrophil accumulation and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in response to Gao-binge ethanol exposure, they were protected from increased inflammatory cytokine expression and hepatocellular injury.

Irf3−/− mice accumulated more Ly6Clow (restorative) monocytes in the liver, associated with a decrease in apoptosis of this population of Ly6Clow monocytes after recruitment.

In contrast, C57BL/6 and the Irf3S1/S1 mice were sensitive to Gao-binge ethanol exposure, associated with an increased proportion of apoptotic Ly6Clow monocytes and a lower ratio of Ly6Clow/Ly6Chigh monocytes.

These data delineate highly novel non-transcriptional functions of IRF3 in ethanol-induced liver injury, identifying for the first time, that, in addition to the antiviral function of IRF3-mediated RIPA, the non-transcriptional activity of IRF3 also plays an important metabolic function in maintaining innate immune homeostasis in the liver.

SECTION

Materials and methods

SECTION

Gao-binge ethanol feeding

PARAGRAPH

All animals received humane care and all procedures using animals were approved by the Cleveland Clinic Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.

Breeding colonies of Irf3−/− and Irf3S1/S1 on a C57BL/6 background10–11 were maintained at the Cleveland Clinic.

Eight to 10 week old female C57BL/6 mice were purchased from Jackson Laboratories (Bar Harbor, ME).

Mice were allowed free access to a Lieber-DeCarli liquid diet (Dyets, Bethlehem, PA; Cat#710260) containing ethanol at 5% (v/v) or 28% of total calories or pair-fed control diet that isocalorically substituted maltose dextrin for ethanol for 10 days.17

On the final day of the experiment, pair-fed mice were gavaged with 5 g/kg maltose and ethanol-fed mice were gavaged with 5 g/kg ethanol in water.

Mice were euthanized 6 h after gavage.

Additional details of the feeding protocol and tissue collection can be found in the supplementary materials and methods section.

SECTION

Patient liver samples from the early transplant tissue repository

PARAGRAPH

De-identified samples from 5 livers explanted from patients with severe AH during liver transplantation or 5 wedge biopsies from healthy donor livers were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 °C.

Samples were provided by the Clinical Resource for Alcoholic Hepatitis Investigations at Johns Hopkins University.

Written informed consent was obtained from each patient included in the study and the study protocol conforms to the ethical guidelines of the 1975 Declaration of Helsinki as reflected in a priori approval by the Institutional Review Boards at Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions.

Descriptive biochemical and clinical data for this cohort have been reported previously.18

SECTION

Biochemical assays, immunohistochemistry and flow cytometry

PARAGRAPH

Detailed methods can be found in the CTAT table and supplementary information.

SECTION

Statistical analysis

PARAGRAPH

Values shown in all figures represent the means ± SEM.

Analysis of variance was performed using the general linear models procedure (SAS, Carey, IN).

Data were log-transformed as necessary to obtain a normal distribution.

Follow-up comparisons were made by least square means testing.

p values of less than 0.05 were considered significant.

PARAGRAPH

For further details regarding the materials used, please refer to the CTAT table and supplementary information.

SECTION

Results

PARAGRAPH

IRF3 is implicated in the progression of ethanol-induced liver injury.

Phosphorylation of IRF3 and expression of STING were increased in livers of patients with AH undergoing liver transplant compared to liver explants from healthy controls (Fig. 1A).

Cleavage of caspase-9, implicated in IRF3-mediated RIPA,10,11 and capase-3 was also higher in livers from patients with AH compared to healthy controls (Fig. 1A).

IRF3 was also phosphorylated in livers of mice in response to Gao-binge ethanol exposure and expression of STING increased (Fig. 1B), consistent with the increase in phospho-IRF3 observed in response to chronic ethanol feeding.12,13

PARAGRAPH

While expression of IRF3 mRNA was not affected by AH (Fig. 1C), expression of the IRF3-dependent genes, IFNβ and IFIT3, was higher in livers from patients with AH compared to healthy controls (Fig. 1C).

Similarly, Irf3 mRNA was not affected by Gao-binge ethanol exposure (Fig. 1D), but expression of Ifit1 and Ifit3 (Fig. 1E,F) were increased in whole liver and Ifnβ expression increased in isolated non-parenchymal cells (Fig. 1G).

As expected, IRF3-mediated gene expression was not induced in Irf3−/− or Irf3S1/S1 mice, which lack IRF3-mediated transcriptional activity (Fig. 1E-G).

PARAGRAPH

Since the non-transcriptional activity of IRF3 is dependent on ubiquitination, we next assessed whether Gao-binge ethanol exposure also increased ubiquitination of IRF3.

Ubiquitinated proteins were pulled down from liver lysates of C57BL/6 and Irf3S1/S1 and then probed for IRF3.

The quantity of IRF3 pulled down with anti-ubiquitin was higher in ethanol-fed mice compared to pair-fed mice (Fig. 1H).

Culture of Huh7 hepatocytes or RAW264.7 macrophages with ethanol also increased the ubiquitination of transfected V5-tagged IRF3 compared to cells cultured without ethanol (Fig. S1).

Taken together, these data indicate that IRF3 is activated in the liver in response to ethanol via both phosphorylation and ubiquitination.

PARAGRAPH

In order to determine if the transcriptional and/or non-transcriptional activity of IRF3 contributed to ethanol-induced liver injury, C57BL/6, Irf3−/− and Irf3S1/S1 mice were exposed to the Gao-binge ethanol and measures of inflammation and hepatocellular injury assessed 6 h post-binge.

Gao-binge ethanol exposure increased indicators of liver injury in C57BL/6 mice, characterized by increased alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) (Fig. 2A) and elevated liver triglycerides (Fig. 2B and Fig. S2), as well as increased expression of mRNA for inflammatory cytokines and chemokines (Fig. 2C).

Irf3−/− mice were protected from these indicators of ethanol-induced liver injury, similar to the protection reported by Petrasek et al., in response to chronic ethanol feeding for 4 weeks.13

If this protection was due to the absence of the transcriptional activity of IRF3, then Irf3S1/S1 mice, expressing only the non-transcriptional activity of IRF3, should also be protected from Gao-binge ethanol exposure.

Importantly, the Irf3S1/S1 mice were sensitive to the injurious effects of acute-on-chronic ethanol exposure (Fig. 2), indicating that it was a non-transcriptional function of IRF3 that contributed to injury.

PARAGRAPH

Interestingly, in the Gao-binge model of ethanol-induced liver injury, very little hepatocyte apoptosis was detected by M30 or TUNEL staining in C57BL/6 mice (data not shown), consistent with earlier reports.19–20

Gao-binge ethanol exposure also impairs the barrier function of the intestine,21 but portal endotoxin concentrations in response to Gao-binge were independent of genotypes (Fig. S3).

Further, liver injury in response to Gao-binge ethanol exposure is also associated with ER stress19 and IRF3 interacts with the ER stress protein STING in response to both acute exposure to ethanol13 and diet-induced obesity.22

Therefore, we hypothesized that the non-transcriptional functions of IRF3 could provide a critical link between induction of ER stress and hepatocellular injury.

Induction of CYP2E1 (Fig. 3A), associated with ethanol-induced ER stress,23 and accumulation of 4-hyroxynonenal adducts (Fig. 3B), an indicator of oxidative stress, in response to Gao-binge were independent of genotype.

Further, phosphorylation of eIF2, an upstream mediator of the ER stress response (Fig. 3C), as well as expression of the spliced form of XBP-1 (Fig. 3D) and multiple mRNA for ER stress response proteins, including DR5, Ero1α, Bak, Gadd34, Grp94, and Grp78, were all increased in response to Gao-binge ethanol exposure in all genotypes (Fig. 3D).

Interestingly, in some measures of ER stress (e.g. CHOP protein, mRNA for Grp78 and Grp94), the baseline expression in the Irf3−/− , but not Irf3S1/S1, mice was moderately elevated even in pair-fed mice (Fig. 3C,D) and even further elevated in response to Gao-binge.

Taken together, these data indicate that multiple measures of ER stress were dissociated from other indicators of liver injury, including ALT/AST and cytokine production.

Indeed, these data are more consistent with a potentially protective role of the ER stress response at this stage of hepatocellular injury.

PARAGRAPH

The Gao-binge model of ethanol-induced liver injury is characterized by a robust infiltration of neutrophils that contributes to hepatocellular inflammation and injury.24

Despite evidence of reduced inflammation and hepatocellular injury in Irf3−/− (e.g. lower ALT/AST, lower expression of inflammatory cytokines), NIMPR14 staining of neutrophils in the liver increased in response to Gao-binge independently of genotype (Fig. 4A,B).

Further, while the percentage of CD45+ non-parenchymal cells (Fig. 4C) was not affected by diet or genotype, the percentage of CD45+/Ly6G+ cells was actually higher in Irf3−/− in response to Gao-binge ethanol exposure, compared to C57BL/6 and Irf3S1/S1 mice (Fig. 4D/E).

Similarly, the expression of Ly6G mRNA (Fig. 4G) was increased in response to Gao-binge ethanol exposure in all genotypes.

Indicators of neutrophil activation, including the percentage of CD45+/CD11b+/Ly6G+ cells and the expression of Elane, an indicator of neutrophil extravasation, were also increased in response to Gao-binge ethanol exposure in all genotypes (Fig. 4F,H and Fig. S4).

Taken together, these data indicate that neither the transcriptional or non-transcriptional functions of IRF3 contribute to the accumulation of activated neutrophils in the liver in response to Gao-binge ethanol exposure.

PARAGRAPH

Since neutrophil accumulation was independent of Irf3 genotype, we hypothesized that the non-transcriptional activity of IRF3 contributed to the pathogenesis of ethanol-induced liver injury via modulation of other innate immune cell populations in the liver.

Therefore, we characterized the interactions between ethanol and Irf3 genotype on the percentage of resident macrophages and infiltrating monocytes in the liver by flow cytometry.

F4/80+ Kupffer cell numbers were not affected by ethanol exposure or genotype (Fig. 5A).

Ly6C+ monocytes were predominantly of the Ly6Clow phenotype (Fig. 5B) rather than Ly6Chigh cells (Fig. 5C).

The relative percentage of Ly6Clow monocytes increased and Ly6Chigh decreased in Irf3−/− mice compared to the other genotypes.

This shift is consistent with a potential restorative/anti-inflammatory function of Ly6Clow monocytes in protecting mice from ethanol-induced injury.6

Sorted Ly6Chigh monocytes expressed more CCR2 compared to Ly6Clow cells (Fig. S5A), while expression of Ifnβ and Ifit1 mRNA was higher in Ly6Clow monocytes (Fig. S5B,C).

PARAGRAPH

Expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines in the total population of isolated non-parenchymal cells revealed a predominant pro-inflammatory milieu in C57BL/6 and Irf3S1/S1 mice, compared to Irf3−/− mice (Fig. 5D-F), consistent with the higher proportion of Ly6Clow to Ly6Chigh in the Irf3−/− mice.

Further, increased expression of Arg1, Cd36 and Fabp4 were indicative of a restorative/anti-inflammatory repertoire in Irf3−/−, compared to C57BL/6 and Irf3S1/S1 mice (Fig. 5G-I).

Taken together, these data suggest that the non-transcriptional function of IRF3 regulated the proportions of specific populations of Ly6Clow/Ly6C high monocytes in the liver in ethanol-induced liver injury.

PARAGRAPH

The differences in Ly6Clow and Ly6Chigh infiltrating monocytes between IRF3 genotypes was not due to a difference the numbers of Ly6Clow or Ly6Chigh monocytes in the bone marrow, circulation or spleen between genotypes (Fig. S6).

Therefore, we hypothesized that if the non-transcriptional activity of IRF3 contributed to apoptosis of hepatic immune cells, the absence of this IRF3-mediated RIPA activity in the Irf3−/− could contribute to increases in specific populations of infiltrating monocytes in response to Gao-binge ethanol exposure.

Isolated non-parenchymal cells were stained with FITC-Annexin V Apoptosis Detection Kit to detect apoptotic cells.

Interestingly, Gao-binge ethanol exposure decreased apoptosis in Ly6G+ cells in C57BL/6 and Irf3S1/S1 mice, while Irf3−/− mice had low percent Annexin V positive neutrophils in both pair-fed and Gao-binge conditions (Fig. 6A).

In contrast, neither diet nor genotype affected the percentage of Annexin V+/F4/80+ cells (Fig. 6B).

Ethanol exposure increased Annexin V+/CD45+/Ly6Clow monocytes from C57BL/6 and Irf3S1/S1, but not Irf3−/−, mice (Fig. 6C), consistent with the higher accumulation of Ly6Clow monocytes in the Irf3−/− mice (Fig. 5B).

Finally, the percentage of Annexin V+/CD45+/Ly6Chigh monocytes was very low and independent of diet or genotype (Fig. 6D).

Taken together, these data suggest that the non-transcriptional function of IRF3 contributes to apoptosis in specific populations of immune cells in the liver, modulating the balance of immune cells active within the hepatic environment in ethanol-induced liver injury.

PARAGRAPH

While the IRF3-RIPA pathway is known to result in apoptosis in response to viral infection, it is not yet known if this mechanism plays a role in metabolic diseases.11

Therefore, we investigated the ability of the TLR3 ligand Poly (I:C) and the TLR4 ligand LPS to activate the IRF3-RIPA pathway in primary cultures of rat hepatic macrophages and hepatic macrophages isolated from C57BL/6, Irf3−/− and Irf3S1/S1 mice.

Hepatic macrophages were stimulated with 25 µg/ml Poly (I:C) or 100 ng/ml LPS and the co-localization of IRF3 with mitochondria assessed by confocal microscopy.

Both ligands induced the translocation of IRF3 to mitochondria after 6 h, with a more robust response observed with Poly (I:C) (Fig. 7A,B).

Poly (I:C) also stimulated a co-localization of IRF3 with Bax (Fig. 7C).

If Poly (I:C) induced translocation of IRF3 to the mitochondria and co-localization with Bax resulted in IRF3-RIPA, then we would expect to detect cleavage products of caspase-9, caspase-3 and PARP.11

Indeed, these indicators of IRF3-RIPA were increased in hepatic macrophages after 6 h challenge with Poly (I:C) (Fig. 7D).

Finally, we tested whether Poly (I:C) stimulated translocation of IRF3 to mitochondria in macrophages required the non-transcriptional activity of IRF3.

Indeed, stimulation with Poly (I:C) induced translocation of IRF3 to the mitochondria in isolated hepatic macrophages from C57BL/6 and Irf3S1/S1 mice; IRF3 was undetectable in Irf3−/− mice (Fig. 7E).

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

IRF3 is an important mediator of innate immune function, exhibiting both transcriptional and non-transcriptional activity.

IRF3-mediated transcription requires activation via phosphorylation, leading to the induction of IFNβ and antiviral genes.9

In contrast, IRF3, independent of phosphorylation or transcription, can also trigger the pro-apoptotic RIPA pathway via interaction with Bax and translocation to mitochondria.10–11

The non-transcriptional RIPA activity of IRF3 contributes to its antiviral immune function; however, the role of RIPA in the innate immune contributions to metabolic diseases, such as AH, have not been investigated.

Irf3−/− mice are protected from chronic ethanol-induced liver injury, suggesting that IRF3 plays a critical role in the progression of ALD.12–13

Interestingly, in bone marrow transplant studies, Irf3-deficiency in hepatocytes actually exacerbated ethanol-induced injury, associated with impaired expression of Type I IFNs by hepatocytes.12

Making use of a novel knock-in mouse that only expresses the non-transcriptional activity of IRF3, we find that the non-transcriptional activity of IRF3-mediated RIPA also contributes to liver injury in the Gao-binge (acute-on-chronic) model of ethanol-induced liver injury.

Our data delineate highly novel functions for the non-transcriptional functions of IRF3 in the progression of ethanol-induced liver injury.

These data demonstrate that, in addition to the antiviral function of RIPA,11 RIPA also plays an important function in maintaining innate immune homeostasis in the liver via regulation of apoptosis of infiltrating monocytes in the liver.

Taken together with previous reports for a contribution of the transcriptional activity of IRF3 in hepatocytes,12 these data indicate that both transcriptional and non-transcriptional activity of IRF3 make cell-type specific contributions to the progression of ethanol-induced liver injury.

PARAGRAPH

Gao-binge ethanol exposure increased multiple measures of hepatocellular injury, including increased ALT/AST, triglycerides and expression of inflammatory cytokines.

Irf3−/−, but not Irf3S1/S1, mice were protected from these indicators of injury, indicating that the non-transcriptional activity of IRF3 was sufficient to drive IRF3-dependent injury in response to ethanol.

One of the non-transcriptional functions of IRF3 was identified in a murine model of obesity-induced NASH wherein IRF3 restricts the movement of the p65 subunit of NF-κB to the nucleus via an interaction with IKKβ.14

However, in the Gao-binge model, induction of inflammatory cytokine and chemokine expression, known to be dependent on NF-κB activity during ethanol exposure,2–3,6 was robustly increased in the livers of both C57BL/6 and Irf3S1/S1 mice, suggesting that, in contrast to obesity-induced NASH,14 the non-transcriptional activity of IRF3 does not restrict the activity of hepatic NF-κB within the context of ethanol-induced liver injury.

The Gao-binge model of ethanol-induced liver injury is also characterized by accumulation of neutrophils in the liver and the development of ER stress.19–20,24

Interestingly, Gao-binge-induced neutrophil accumulation and ER stress were independent of Irf3 genotype.

These data indicate that not only are neutrophil accumulation and ER stress independent of IRF3 activity, but these pathways of Gao-binge-induced injury are likely necessary, but not sufficient, to induce hepatocellular injury.

PARAGRAPH

Instead, we find that the non-transcriptional activity of IRF3 modulated the accumulation of infiltrating monocytes in the liver in response to Gao-binge ethanol exposure.

Infiltrating monocytes are known to contribute to both inflammation, typically characterized as Ly6Chigh, and restoration/repair, characterized as Ly6Clow, in a number of models of liver injury,25 including chronic ethanol-induced steatosis/early inflammation26 and carbon tetrachloride-induced fibrosis.27

Depending on the stage of injury/repair, infiltrating monocytes can acquire multiple phenotypes, exhibiting pro-inflammatory, anti-inflammatory or pro-resolution/remodeling functional activity.6

At 6 h post-binge, Ly6Clow monocytes were the predominant infiltrating monocytes in the liver of wild-type mice, with no increase in numbers in response to Gao-binge (Fig. 5).

However, in Irf3−/− mice, there was a robust increase in Ly6Clow infiltrating monocytes and a reduction in Ly6Chigh infiltrating monocytes, favoring a reduction in the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines by hepatic non-parenchymal cells and an induction of mRNAs associated with restorative monocytes, including Arg1, Cd36 and Fabp4.

Importantly, this protective accumulation of Ly6Clow monocytes was abrogated in the C57BL/6 and Irf3S1/S1 mice, consistent with the increased expression of inflammatory mediators and hepatocyte injury in these mice (Fig. 5).

PARAGRAPH

It is interesting to note that there is a predominant accumulation of Ly6Clow monocytes at 6 h after the Gao-binge at 20–30% of CD45+ cells, compared to only 2–3% of Ly6Chigh monocytes (Fig. 5B,C).

This contrasts with the predominant recruitment of Ly6Chigh monocytes early in response to CCl4, which then convert to a Ly6Clow restorative phenotype.27

Given the very low numbers of Ly6Chigh monocytes in the liver, it is unlikely that there was a strong conversion of Ly6Chigh to Ly6Clow monocytes within the 6 h time frame.

In contrast, it is possible that the nature of the hepatocellular injury in Gao-binge recruits Ly6Clow monocytes, which patrol endothelial surfaces for injury,28 rather than Ly6Chigh monocytes, which are recruited to sites of inflammation.28

PARAGRAPH

The increased accumulation of Ly6Clow infiltrating monocytes in the Irf3−/− mice could be due to enhanced recruitment and/or decreased removal of cells.

Since IRF3-mediated RIPA is identified as a non-transcriptional function of IRF3 and apoptosis of immune cells is an important mechanism for regulation of inflammatory responses, we investigated the interaction between Gao-binge-induced accumulation of infiltrating monocytes with an Irf3 genotype.

Interestingly, Gao-binge ethanol exposure had a differential impact on apoptosis of hepatic immune cells in wild-type mice, as assessed by Annexin V staining, with ethanol decreasing neutrophil apoptosis and increasing apoptosis in Ly6Clow monocytes, with no apparent apoptosis in resident Kupffer cells or Ly6Chigh monocytes (Fig. 6).

Further, the non-transcriptional activity of IRF3 also differentially contributed to apoptosis in specific immune cell populations, with no role in neutrophils, but increasing apoptosis in Ly6Clow monocytes.

Taken together, these data suggest that apoptosis is ongoing during the acute response to ethanol binge, likely contributing to the dynamic remodeling of cell populations in the liver, and that IRF3-mediated RIPA is one mechanism contributing to this dynamic regulation of immune cell populations in the liver in response to ethanol.

SECTION

Financial support

PARAGRAPH

This work was supported in part by NIH grants; P50 AA024333, U01AA021890 and RO1AA023722 (LEN); R01 AA023722 (LEN and XL); RO1AI073303 (GS); R21AA026017 (SC); F32 AA024595 and K99AA026648 (KLP) and F31 AA024017 (DB).

This work was also supported in part by the Case Western Reserve University/Cleveland Clinic CTSA UL1RR024989 and utilized the Leica SP5 confocal/multi-photon microscope that was purchased with partial funding from National Institutes of Health SIG grant 1S10RR026820.

SECTION

Conflict of interest

PARAGRAPH

The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists.

PARAGRAPH

Please refer to the accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.

SECTION

Authors’ contributions

PARAGRAPH

Study concept and design: LE Nagy, G Sen. Acquisition of data; analysis and interpretation of data: C Sanz, KL Poulsen, D Bellos, H Wang, M McMullen S Chattopadhyay, G Sen, LE Nagy.

Drafting of the manuscript: LE Nagy.

Critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content: C Sanz, KL Poulsen, D Bellos, MR McMullen, H Wang, X Li, S Chattopadhyay, G Sen, LE Nagy.

Statistical analysis: C Sanz, LE Nagy.

Obtained funding: LE Nagy, G Sen, S Chattopadhyay, X Li.