10.1016/j.jasrep.2018.08.014

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Following the yellow brick road: Yellow slip clays and the production of Rio Grande Glaze Ware in north central New Mexico

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Among ethnohistoric potters, the raw materials used to make pottery often come from a variety of locations.

Some resources such as clay or temper are widely available and are typically obtained close to the area of production (Arnold, 1985).

Other resources, such as slip clays or pigments, are more limited in their availability and potters may travel longer distances to obtain these materials (Dillingham, 1992; Najohai and Phelps, 1998; Parsons, 1932).

Acquisition of these more specialized materials are embedded within social and economic networks of varying scales; this may have also been the case in the past (Herhahn, 2006; Huntley et al., 2012; Nelson and Habicht-Mauche, 2006).

In this study, we are specifically examining the provenance of yellow-firing clays used in the production of Ancestral Pueblo glaze-painted pottery at two villages in north central New Mexico.

PARAGRAPH

The majority of ceramic provenance studies in the Southwest United States have focused either on mineralogical analyses (Capone, 2006; Eckert, 2008; Habicht-Mauche, 1993, 2002; Shepard, 1942) or bulk chemical compositional techniques (Crown, 1994; Glowacki et al., 1998; Huntley, 2008).

However, the development of numerous chemical compositional techniques has provided multiple avenues for archaeologists to explore the provenance of specific clays, tempers, slips, and paints (e.g., Duwe and Neff, 2007; Habicht-Mauche et al., 2000).

This research focuses on understanding the provenance of the yellow-firing clay used as slip on glaze-decorated pottery produced during the 14th through 17th centuries in north central New Mexico (Fig. 1).

Specifically, we collected chemical signatures derived from laser ablation-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS) of historic bricks, clay samples, and ceramic sherds from Tunque Pueblo (LA 240) and San Marcos Pueblo (LA 98).

We interpret these data to explore the distribution of raw materials required to make pottery and to discuss social networks that may have facilitated the movement of these materials.

PARAGRAPH

Our goals were threefold.

First, we wanted to identify which of the clays available in the vicinity of Tunque Pueblo were used by late prehispanic and early colonial (1400–1680 CE) potters to produce yellow-slipped glaze-painted pottery.

Not surprisingly, we found that Tunque Pueblo potters were using a selection of the yellow-firing clays available near their village.

Second, we wanted to explore whether or not the clays available at Tunque Pueblo were used by potters at San Marcos Pueblo, located about 30 km to the northeast.

We argue that San Marcos potters were probably using yellow-firing clays from Tunque Pueblo to slip at least some of their vessels, however these slip clays were not the same as those used by Tunque potters for the body of their vessels.

Third, we explore what these data tell us about the nature of social networks among villages during the late prehispanic and early colonial periods in north central New Mexico.

We argue that it is more appropriate in the context of our study to discuss how strategies of resource acquisition built enduring social relationships between specific households and villages within this region rather than to discuss ‘local’ versus ‘nonlocal’ pottery production per se.

SECTION

The archaeological setting

PARAGRAPH

Early in the fourteenth century, major demographic shifts occurred in north central New Mexico including a significant population increase (Snead et al., 2004).

Villages built at this time were much larger than previously dispersed settlements (Crown et al., 1996).

The rapid construction of so many large villages has led researchers to suggest various models of social reorganization including tribalization (Habicht-Mauche, 1993), clustered confederacies (Spielmann, 1994), and alliances (Creamer, 2000; Creamer and Haas, 1998; Wilcox, 1991).

Archaeologists have recognized changes in other social dynamics that are associated with these settlement shifts, including new ritual systems, expansion of exchange networks, and dramatic changes in ceramic production traditions (Eckert, 2008; Habicht-Mauche, 1993; Habicht-Mauche et al., 2006; Huntley, 2008; Spielmann, 1998).

PARAGRAPH

In conjunction with these demographic changes, most potters moved away from making black-on-white pottery and began to produce glaze-decorated pottery known as Rio Grande Glaze Ware (Eckert, 2006).

Slip color is often the defining characteristic that distinguishes among varieties and types of Rio Grande Glaze Ware vessels (Eckert, 2006).

Yellow as a slip color was first identified by Nelson in his study of Tano ruins (Nelson, 1916).

Since then the term ‘yellow’ has been used in the formal descriptions of various Rio Grande Glaze Ware types (Eckert, 2006; Kidder and Kidder, 1917; Kidder and Shepard, 1936; Nelson, 1916).

However, the descriptor ‘yellow’ often refers to a broad range of light surface colors that can vary markedly even on the same vessel.

Kidder and Kidder (1917) noted that the slips were “yellowish” or “pinkish-gray,” and “white through cream to yellow.”

Mera (1933: 4) observed that, “although termed yellow,” it might even be a dirty white.

Kidder and Shepard (1936: 80) remarked that Pecos Glaze II slips “can only be described as light,” as the color variety is “endless, and is never really white or truly yellow or positively gray, but ranges from dirty yellowish, or grayish, to pinkish buff.”

As such, the generic descriptive term ‘yellow’ has been used in the archaeological literature more to emphasize the break in technology from the preceding black-on-white ceramic series, as well as in comparison with the contemporaneous red series of Rio Grande Glaze Ware types, than to denote a specific color.

PARAGRAPH

In an attempt to increase our understanding of the production and distribution of yellow-slipped pottery, we focus this study on vessels recovered from two villages that were major centers of glaze-painted pottery manufacture: Tunque Pueblo and San Marcos Pueblo.

Tunque Pueblo seems to have been at the height of its population from 1450 CE to 1550 (Armstrong et al., 2011).

Both Nelson's early excavations and more recent fieldwork (Armstrong et al., 2011; Barnett, 1969; Bice, 1990; Morales, 1997) recovered direct evidence for pottery manufacture at Tunque Pueblo including puki fragments (molds used for starting hand built vessels), pot-polishing stones, fired and unfired clay, and various slip clays and pigments.

Pottery manufactured at Tunque Pueblo can be identified by the presence of a particular type of temper: hornblende latite ash (Habicht-Mauche, 1993; Nelson and Habicht-Mauche, 2006; Warren, 1969, 1979, 1981).

PARAGRAPH

San Marcos Pueblo's chronology is complex (Ramenofsky et al., 2009; Ramenofsky and Schleher, 2017), but the site appears to have been occupied throughout the entire Rio Grande Glaze Ware sequence (1300–1680 CE).

Pottery manufactured at San Marcos Pueblo can be identified by the presence of a particular type of temper: weathered augite monzonite (Habicht-Mauche, 1993; Nelson and Habicht-Mauche, 2006; Schleher, 2010; Warren, 1979, 1981).

Schleher (2010: 111) has convincingly demonstrated that, depending on time period, an average of 81% of the total sample of glaze-painted pottery recovered at the pueblo was produced at this village based upon petrographic analyses.

PARAGRAPH

Of specific interest to us is that, although yellow-slipped pottery was produced at both villages, yellow-firing clays are more readily available at Tunque Pueblo than at San Marcos Pueblo.

Specifically, Snow has noted in various informal settings the yellowish hue of some of the bricks produced at the historic Tonque Brick Works factory on the west edge of the ruins.

He has suggested that Tunque potters not only used this easily available clay in the production of their own yellow-bodied (unslipped and polished) pottery, but might have provided the yellow slips for similar (albeit red-bodied) pottery produced at other villages during the same period, especially San Marcos Pueblo.

The clay deposits closest to San Marcos pueblo fire red (Schleher, 2010; Schleher et al., 2002); yet, large amounts of yellow-slipped pottery were produced at San Marcos for close to four centuries (Schleher, 2010; Ramenofsky, 2012).

PARAGRAPH

Based on prolific amounts of glaze ware pottery exported from these two sites, San Marcos and Tunque Pueblos were arguably the largest producers of glaze-on-yellow pottery from the 1400s through the 1500s (Warren, 1969, 1979); but they were not the only producers of Rio Grande Glaze Ware in the region (Creamer, 2000; Nelson and Habicht-Mauche, 2006; Reed, 1990).

Other villages in the nearby Galisteo Basin exhibit evidence of pottery production, including San Lazaro (Blinman et al., 2012; Fenn, 2004; Warren, 1979), San Cristobal Pueblo (Reed, 1990; Warren, 1979), and Pueblo Galisteo (Warren, 1979).

As a matter of fact, both Reed (1990) and Warren (1979) suggested that almost every site they examined in the Galisteo Basin produced at least some pottery, an observation that requires more extensive research than offered here.

PARAGRAPH

Because San Marcos and Tunque Pueblos have been the focus of more extensive research on pottery production than other Galisteo Basin villages, the unique temper signatures that exist for these two pueblos have yet to be determined for the other villages.

The presence of various types of igneous rock temper is used to identify pottery production at Galisteo Basin sites other than San Marcos Pueblo (Habicht-Mauche, 1993; Nelson and Habicht-Mauche, 2006; Warren, 1979, 1981).

Based on the current evidence, none of the potters at these other Galisteo Basin villages were as major producers as the potters at San Marcos and Tunque Pueblos.

With this in mind, and with our limited resources to do chemical characterization sampling, it made sense to focus this project on these two villages.

If residents of Tunque Pueblo could have supplied villages such as San Marcos Pueblo in the north-central Rio Grande villages with slip clay, then this knowledge has important implications for modeling regional social networks and economic interaction during the late prehispanic and early colonial periods.

Such modeling can help inform, but also be refined by, further research at other villages throughout the Galisteo Basin.

SECTION

The geological setting

PARAGRAPH

Geologically, the Galisteo-Tonque area lies on the eastern edge of the Rio Grande Depression, and extends from the north end of the Sandia Mountains to the south end of the Sagre de Cristo Mountains (Stearns, 1953).

The geology in this area of north-central New Mexico is highly variable (Scholle, 2003), having been formed by fluvial deposition, alluvial redeposition, surface volcanism, intrusive igneous activity and associated deformation, and periods of erosion.

This geological diversity is ideal for archaeological studies, allowing for potential characterization of temper, clay, and pigment across the landscape.

The current study focuses on clay available within an approximately 5-kilometer radius of two sites as an initial attempt to trace the movement of slip clay; but the geology of the greater region will need to be considered in future studies that attempt to more clearly reconstruct past social interactions.

PARAGRAPH

Tunque Pueblo sits atop the Mancos Group (Scholle, 2003), which is dominated by shale and other mudrocks (Stearns, 1953).

Within an easy walk from the site lies the Mesa Verde Formation (which overlies the Mancos Group), dominated by sandstones and shales.

Unique to this area is the Cano Member of the Mesa Verde Formation, a tongue of sandstone interbedded within the underlying Mancos Group and only recognized in the Tonque Valley (Stearns, 1953).

Also within 5 km is the Todilto Limestone of the Wanakah Formation, overlain by massive gypsum.

The Galisteo Formation (1/3 of which consists of deep-red, maroon, and purple clays) and the Dockum Group (composed of red and variegated sandstone and shale) also lie within approximately 5 km of the site (Stearns, 1943, 1953).

PARAGRAPH

With the exception of the Todilto Limestone, the geological setting of Tunque Pueblo provides various red (high‑iron) and yellow (low-iron) firing clays suitable for pottery production.

Local clays used to produce bricks at the Tonque Brick Works fired to light red, reddish yellow, and very pale brown (considered yellow for our purposes here) based on Munsell soil chart (only the yellow bricks were used in this study).

Clay samples collected from on or near Tunque Pueblo and fired by the authors produced the same range of yellow and red hues as the bricks (only the yellow samples were used in this study).

The unslipped surface of glaze-on-yellow pottery produced at Tunque Pueblo exhibit a slightly greater range of hues than the brick and clay samples, but include the same light red, reddish yellow, and very pale brown.

PARAGRAPH

San Marcos Pueblo sits atop the Espinaso Volcanics (Scholle, 2003), comprised primarily of latite but also andesite and other intermediate volcanic material; intermediate igneous intrusions unassociated with these volcanics are also within 5 km of the site (Stearns, 1953).

As with Tunque Pueblo, San Marcos Pueblo is within 5 km of the Mancos Group (specifically the Dakota Sandstone Subdivision) and the Mesa Verde Formation.

A poorly defined pediment - alternatively referred to as mesa gravels (Lee, 1907), Tuerto Gravels (Stearns, 1953), and Ortiz Gravels (Kelley and Northrop, 1975) - also lies within 5 km of the village.

PARAGRAPH

The most abundant and closest clay deposits to San Marcos Pueblo are weathering from the Espinaso Volcanics (Disbrow and Stoll, 1957).

Clay coming from some of these iron-rich outcrops fire red (Schleher, 2010; Schleher et al., 2002).

The clay colors of experimental tiles fired from these Espinaso Volcanics clays match pastes in pottery vessels made at San Marcos (Schleher et al., 2002); no yellow firing clays were identified.

However, there are limited outcrops of the Mancos Group (including the Dakota Sandstone Subdivision) and the Mesa Verde Formation within 7 km of San Marcos Pueblo and extensive outcrops within 13 km.

Unfortunately, potentially yellow-firing clays from these outcrops were not accessible at the time this research was conducted.

PARAGRAPH

It should be mentioned that other sites in the Galisteo Basin (including but not limited to Pueblo Blanco, Pueblo Galisteo, and San Lazaro Pueblo) have close and more extensive outcrops of the Mancos Group and Mesa Verde Formation than those at San Marcos Pueblo (Scholle, 2003) and may also have been a source of yellow-firing clays.

The Espinaso Volcanics also outcrop near some of these villages (Scholle, 2003).

For example, experimental tiles made from clays collected from the San Lazaro clay mine (Fenn, 2004: 79) fire red.

As observed by Schleher, these tiles match some glaze-on-yellow sherd pastes and may reflect production at San Lazaro Pueblo.

PARAGRAPH

Overall, the geology of the study area is complex with limited research having been performed to characterize the clays of this region.

As already mentioned, we know that Tunque and San Marcos Pueblos were the two major production centers for glaze-on-yellow pottery.

As discussed below, we also know that finished vessels and lead to make glaze paint moved between these two villages.

While we know that the yellow slip clays used on San Marcos pottery may have been collected from a number of different untested sources, we also know that three of the four yellow color groups identified on sherds produced at San Marcos Pueblo match the color groups observed on sherds produced at Tunque Pueblo.

Overall, then, the experimental firing provided an initial indication in testing whether or not some of the slips applied to yellow-slipped vessels produced at San Marcos Pueblo could have originated near Tunque Pueblo.

We decided to test this possibility further with chemical characterization.

However, we see this research as one step in the study of interaction rather than a final explanation; we hope it will generate discussion and further research within the region.

SECTION

The sample

PARAGRAPH

Our study used chemical characterization by LA-ICP-MS to examine 72 samples consisting of a combination of ceramic sherds, bricks, and ceramic tiles made from field clays (Table 1).

In terms of ceramic sherds, we were specifically interested in yellow-slipped Rio Grande Glaze Ware types that were made at Tunque Pueblo and San Marcos Pueblo.

Seventy years of extensive regional petrographic research on both decorated and utility wares provides confidence that production provenance can be determined for these two sites: pottery produced at Tunque Pueblo has a characteristically light-colored paste, is normally unslipped and polished, and is tempered with hornblende-latite ash (Warren, 1969, 1979, 1981; Nelson and Habicht-Mauche, 2006); pottery produced at San Marcos Pueblo has a dark gray or red paste, is yellow-slipped, and is tempered with weathered augite-monzonite (Nelson and Habicht-Mauche, 2006; Schleher, 2010; Warren, 1979, 1981).

Using these criteria, a sample of 31 sherds produced at and recovered from Tunque Pueblo was selected along with a sample of 28 sherds produced at and recovered from San Marcos Pueblo.

PARAGRAPH

Six ceramic tiles made of field clay collected from the vicinity of Tunque Pueblo and seven bricks made at the historic Tonque Brick Works located along the west edge of the archaeological village were included for comparison with the archaeological ceramic samples.

The Tonque Brick Works was established in 1909 and operated until 1942, resulting in the destruction of a portion of the archaeological site (Armstrong et al., 2011).

The factory mined local clays; as discussed above, the resulting bricks vary in color from yellow to red.

Modern access to the historic brick factory and the archaeological village is restricted and sampling is not permitted; however, prior to these restrictions, an avocational archaeologist (who has requested anonymity) collected clays and bricks.

While the clays were collected from “all along the Hagen road just east of the ruin,” the bricks were collected from the “spoils piles” at the abandoned factory.

Although not ideal, this sample is currently the only comparative sample available for analysis and there is little reason to doubt its provenience.

PARAGRAPH

Various sociopolitical, curatorial, and economic factors limited our initial access to archaeological ceramic samples for destructive analysis and access to clay and brick samples.

Methodologically, then, our sample is not ideal in terms of size or selection technique.

While these conditions were less than optimal for standard ceramic characterization studies, our results presented below provide potentially significant implications for interpreting social networks between communities of potters.

We hope that these preliminary results encourage other researchers to pursue similar provenance studies of pottery slips from this and other regions of the Southwest using larger and more robust samples.

We also hope that our study can serve as a model for researchers, regardless of the region in which they work, who are hesitant to perform analyses on less-than-ideal assemblages.

Exploring data patterns while recognizing sampling constraints allows us to broaden our analyses to include the many archaeological collections in museums with various methodological limitations, in turn allowing us to tentatively broaden our interpretations of past human behavior.

SECTION

LA-ICP-MS methodology and statistical analyses

PARAGRAPH

LA-ICP-MS is a microprobe technique determined to be appropriate for this study because, unlike bulk analyses more suitable for homogenous materials, LA-ICP-MS allows for characterization of specific components of heterogeneous materials (Cogswell et al., 2005; Neff, 2003).

In this case we focused on characterizing clays used for ceramic slips and compared them to bulk raw clay and historic bricks; the strength of the technique is that it allowed us to target clay particles in each sample while ignoring non-plastic inclusions and so we could control for the issue of differences in original material preparation.

LA-ICP-MS analyses were conducted on a Perkin Elmer Elan DRCII housed at the Elemental Analysis Laboratory, Department of Chemistry, Texas A&M University under the direction of Dr. William Dennis James.

PARAGRAPH

A New Wave UP-213 laser ablation system with associated software was used for sample induction.

At the start of each batch of 10 samples, a series of standards were analyzed: NIST standard SRM 610, NIST standard SRM 612, Glass Buttes obsidian, Pachuca obsidian, and MURR's Ohio Red Clay.

A blank (the machine was run with no sample) was also run prior to each batch.

The standards and blank runs were used to calibrate data using the Gratuze method discussed below (Gratuze, 1999; Neff, 2003; Speakman and Neff, 2005).

Prior to the analyses, the following parameters were set: the diameter of the laser beam was adjusted to 30 μm; each pass of the laser over the sample would remove approximately 5 μm of material; the repetition rate of the laser was set to 10 Hz; and the maximum energy of the beam was set to 70%.

A laser pass pattern was customized for each sample to avoid non-plastic inclusions.

After an initial pass over a surface to remove possible surface contaminants, a second ablation pass was needed to generate abundance data for 38 elements.

PARAGRAPH

Raw count elemental signals collected from the LA-ICP-MS analyses were quantified using an approach outlined by Gratuze et al. (2001).

The formulas for this approach are explained and provided by both Neff (2003) and Speakman and Neff (2005).

Briefly put, the approach corrects for background noise, standardizes by calculating a ratio to the counts for a single element (in our case, Al), and converts elemental signals to signals of their oxides.

These signals are then converted to oxide concentrations, with a result that the sum of the oxide concentrations within each sample will equal 100.

The assumption underlying this quantification is that all elements being measured represent all of the material, other than oxygen, that is ablated from the samples.

This assumption may introduce some error for elements that occur in more than one oxidation state and ignores any water that may have been in the sample.

Overall, however, experiments on a range of materials, including ceramic, have shown that this approach yields results in reasonable agreement with data generated by other geochemical techniques (Neff, 2003; Speakman and Neff, 2005).

Oxide concentrations were then log base-10 transformed so as to scale the dataset to a similar order of magnitude to account for differences in concentration between major and trace elements as well as to produce a more nearly normal distribution (Baxter, 2003).

PARAGRAPH

Three techniques were used to explore patterning in the data and create statistically defensible and archaeologically interpretable groupings: principal components analysis (PCA), k-means clustering, and bivariate plots.

Although not the only statistical methods used in compositional studies (Baxter, 2003; Bishop et al., 1982), these techniques are commonly used and were selected as the best suite of techniques given our sample size.

Statistics were performed using XLSTAT 19.4.

PARAGRAPH

PCA (Shennan, 1997) compresses a large number of variables into a smaller number of uncorrelated variables called principal components (PC); the first principal component accounts for as much of the variability as possible, and each remaining component accounts for as much of the remaining variability as possible.

K-means cluster analysis (Baxter, 2003) is a non-hierarchical clustering method used for grouping cases; its advantage over other clustering methods is that as a non-hierarchal technique it minimizes intracluster variation while maximizing intercluster variation.

The cluster solution with the greatest difference between the average sum of the squared distances for randomly generated data and the original data is considered to be the “best” cluster solution (Kintigh and Ammerman, 1982).

Bivariate plots provide an easy means to visually examine the relationship between any two elements and helps in exploring which elements may be driving separation into compositional groups.

SECTION

Results

PARAGRAPH

One sherd (t18) recovered from Tunque Pueblo consistently appeared as an anomaly during initial statistical analyses.

This sample was relatively high in Ca, Cu, Zn and Sr when compared to the dataset as a whole.

It may reflect a clay source that our study did not sample or it may reflect a vessel produced at a different village.

Alternatively, this sherd may reflect sampling error during the LA-ICP-MS analysis in which the analyst accidentally sampled a portion of a non-plastic inclusion.

Without further data, it is impossible to evaluate these options further; this sherd was considered an outlier and was removed from the dataset in the below analysis.

PARAGRAPH

PCA was run on transformed but unstandardized data to highlight the minor and trace element optimizing the ability to identify different clays from a similar resource procurement area (Baxter, 2003:78).

The first two principal components account for 54.6% of the variability observed in the LA-ICP-MS analyses, while the first three components account for 62.5%.

Samples plotted by provenience (Fig. 2) show a segregation of sherds recovered from the two villages: sherds recovered from Tunque Pueblo group primarily in the lower half of the graph, especially in the lower right portion; sherds recovered from San Marco Pueblo group primarily in the upper half of the graph, especially in the upper left portion.

Most of the Tunque Pueblo sherds group with two clays; while most of the San Marcos sherds group with a clay and a brick.

The greater chemical diversity in the brick and clay samples when compared to the pottery samples suggests that the geology of the Tunque area is diverse but potters were only selecting a subsample of available clays for pottery production.

This selectiveness on the part of potters is no surprise, but needs to be remembered in future studies of the region; the presence of clay near a site does not necessarily mean the use of that clay by potters.

PARAGRAPH

A k-means 5-cluster solution (Table 2) was determined to be the best cluster solution (Kintigh and Ammerman, 1982).

This solution groups the assemblage with the largest cluster (N = 24) dominated by samples from San Marcos Pueblo and the other large cluster (N = 23) dominated by samples from Tunque Pueblo.

Both of these large clusters also contain one brick or clay sample.

Samples plotted by k-means 5-cluster solution using the first two PCA components show comfortable agreement between the two methods (Fig. 3).

PARAGRAPH

Not surprisingly given their geological proximity, there is a great deal of chemical similarity between the clays, bricks, and sherds produced at Tunque Pueblo; yellow slips on the sherds produced at San Marcos Pueblo share in that similarity.

Bivariate plots help visualize that clusters are driven by differences in Mn, Cr, Pr, Th, and U (Figs. 4 and 5; see also Table 2); for example, cluster 4 samples have relatively low Mn concentrations and high U concentrations when compared to cluster 2 samples, while cluster 2 samples have relatively high Mn concentrations and low Cr concentrations when compared to cluster 1 samples.

Clay 1 and the majority (N = 23) of Tunque sherds group together into Cluster 4.

Cluster 4 has relatively low concentrations of Mn and Cr, and high concentrations of U, Pr and Th when compared to other clusters.

In other words, sherds collected during the excavation of Tunque Pueblo can be matched compositionally to a specific clay sample collected in the vicinity of the village.

Clusters 3 and 5 also contain sherds from Tunque Pueblo as well as local brick and clay samples, suggesting that Tunque potters were using a variety of locally available clays to form their vessels.

This is not really surprising, as archaeologists have suspected for a long time that clays used by Tunque potters were collected from the same area as the clays used by the historic Tonque Brick Works.

PARAGRAPH

All of the San Marcos sherds (N = 30), three Tunque sherds, and the remainder of the bricks and clay samples group into Cluster 1 and 2.

PARAGRAPH

Interpretatively, it would seem that San Marcos potters were using clays that were available from near Tunque Pueblo to slip their vessels, but it was a different subset of clays than the Tunque potters favored to produce their own yellow-bodied vessels.

This result probably speaks to the nature of the different clays available near Tunque Pueblo; while only a subset of those clays fired to the appropriate range of color desired by the potters, only a subset of that subset may have been appropriate to build a vessel.

In other words, the characteristics of a clay required to produce a vessel are different than the characteristics of a clay required to slip a vessel.

Tunque residents were not only aware of these differences, but were reserving specific body clays for their own pottery production, while making the other yellow-firing clays available to potters from other villages for use as a slip.

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

We argue both San Marcos and Tunque potters were using yellow-firing clays available from the vicinity of Tunque Pueblo, but they were using these clays in different ways.

Tunque potters were making yellow-bodied, self-slipped vessels with a subset of locally available clays; San Marcos potters were using a different subset of clays from the Tunque vicinity as a yellow slip on their red-bodied vessels.

In other words, although potters at these two villages were using distinctive production techniques, they were both incorporating clays available from Tunque Pueblo into their vessels.

Similarly, potters at both villages were using the same lead source near San Marcos Pueblo (Habicht-Mauche et al., 2000, 2002; Nelson and Habicht-Mauche, 2006; Huntley et al., 2007; Huntley, 2008) and the same glaze recipes (Schleher et al., 2012) to make their paint.

It is tempting to speculate that San Marcos residents controlled access to lead ore for glaze paints while Tunque residents restricted access to yellow slip clays.

However, the story may not have been that straightforward: we know there are probably other sources of yellow firing clay available to San Marcos potters, including from the not-so-distant San Pedro district (Shepard, 1942); further, there was lead available from the Placitas source immediately adjacent to Tunque Pueblo (Nelson and Habicht-Mauche, 2006).

So the question is not simply one of access.

PARAGRAPH

Historically, resources for pottery production moved between Pueblo villages and between families of potters at different villages.

Dillingham (1992:47) noted that “Acoma and Laguna potters have traded their desirable, fine white slip with craftspeople from Zuni”.

Parsons (1932:351) observed that Isleta potters “still buy their paints from the Laguna colonists” [at Isleta], which are obtained from localities near Old Laguna.

Further, in the 1920s, a Tewa-speaking potter from Santa Clara Pueblo, Monica Silva, married into Keresan Santo Domingo Pueblo (Crane, 1928:243).

Her children at Santo Domingo Pueblo retain kin ties with Santa Clara to this day, bringing red slip clay to potters of their mother's lineage there (personal communication to Snow, name withheld by request; also see LeFree, 1975:21).

We argue that the movement of slip clays and glaze paints between San Marcos Pueblo and Tunque Pueblo may reflect similar scenarios during the late prehispanic and early colonial eras.

PARAGRAPH

It is interesting to note that decorated vessels were also moving between San Marcos Pueblo and Tunque Pueblo (Warren, 1979, 1981; Nelson and Habicht-Mauche, 2006; Schleher, 2010); for example, approximately 9% of glaze ware sherds recovered from San Marcos were made at Tunque Pueblo (Schleher, personal observation).

While this level of pottery exchange between villages was not insignificant, it suggests that the social network through which this pottery was moving had to have been of an altogether different type and scale than the one used to obtain slip clay required to make much of the yellow-slipped pottery at San Marcos over the almost 400 years of glaze ware production.

Nelson and Habicht-Mauche (2006) have argued previously that within north central New Mexico glaze ware pots circulated among communities that shared a similar ethnolinguistic identity, most likely as a result of pot-luck style feasting and other inter-community activities.

More specialized resources, such as lead for glaze-paint and slip clays, appear to have circulated differently, linking households across these ethnolinguistic clusters into much broader networks of regional interactions.

The movement of these more specialized ceramic resources may reflect the kinds of eclectic and historically contingent, kin-based relationships between households from different ethnolinguistic villages recorded ethnographically and outlined above.

PARAGRAPH

By producing pottery using resources obtained from multiple sources, potters may not only have been affirming social ties but were literally tying their pottery vessels to a broader social and cosmological landscape.

Potters who produced vessels with clay from one village, but decorated with slip clay or lead for glaze-paint from the other village, would have been creating vessels that physically embodied the potter's social world.

In addition, specific resources may also have been connected to historically and cosmologically significant places on the landscape making them embodiments of a community-centered historic and mythic world.

If such were the case, then the exchange of finished pottery between communities may have been of less significance to the creation of enduring regional social networks than the acquisition of specific ceramic resources required to produce pottery.

SECTION

Conclusions

PARAGRAPH

The results of the current study, as well as previous studies of the circulation of lead for glaze-paint production in this same region (Habicht-Mauche et al., 2000, 2002; Huntley et al., 2007; Huntley, 2008; Nelson and Habicht-Mauche, 2006), suggest that inter-community ties as reflected in resource procurement were amazingly stable through time.

But this project is only one of a suite of projects attempting to understand the movement of different types of resources up and down the Rio Grande valley.

Once completed, these studies will need to be synthesized to create a broader understanding of the nature of different scales of social networks at play in this period of ethnogenesis.

In developing such a synthesis, we suggest that Whiteley's concept of ‘relationality’ may be of great value (Whiteley, 2004).

Physical access to material resources may have been of far less significance than perceptions of exchange dependencies.

Social fictions about the adequacy of specific resources might have played a role in the genesis of identity on the one hand, and the development of exchange networks on the other.

For example, making yellow-slipped pottery may have been an important ethnic marker for San Marcos potters, but the yellow slip clay may also have had to have originated from Tunque Pueblo.

As Whiteley explains (2004: 149), such social fictions preserve exchange dependencies because difference must be “established or recognized as a means for exchange, and thereby alliance, producing distinctions at one level simultaneous with identity at another.”