10.1016/j.jhep.2019.04.009

ABSTRACT

TITLE

Chronic hepatitis delta virus infection leads to functional impairment and severe loss of MAIT cells

PARAGRAPH

Hepatitis delta virus (HDV) infection is the most severe form of viral hepatitis.

Although HDV-associated liver disease is considered immune-mediated, adaptive immune responses against HDV are weak.

Thus, the role of several other cell-mediated mechanisms such as those driven by mucosa-associated invariant T (MAIT) cells, a group of innate-like T cells highly enriched in the human liver, has not been extensively studied in clinical HDV infection.

PARAGRAPH

MAIT cells from a sizeable cohort of patients with chronic HDV were analyzed ex vivo and in vitro after stimulation.

Results were compared with MAIT cells from hepatitis B virus (HBV) monoinfected patients and healthy controls.

PARAGRAPH

Circulating MAIT cells were dramatically decreased in the peripheral blood of HDV-infected patients.

Signs of decline were also observed in the liver.

In contrast, only a modest decrease of circulating MAIT cells was noted in HBV monoinfection.

Unsupervised high-dimensional analysis of residual circulating MAIT cells in chronic HDV infection revealed the appearance of a compound phenotype of CD38hiPD-1hiCD28loCD127loPLZFloEomesloHelioslo cells indicative of activation.

Corroborating these results, MAIT cells exhibited a functionally impaired responsiveness.

In parallel to MAIT cell loss, HDV-infected patients exhibited signs of monocyte activation and increased levels of proinflammatory cytokines IL-12 and IL-18.

In vitro, IL-12 and IL-18 induced an activated MAIT cell phenotype similar to the one observed ex vivo in HDV-infected patients.

These cytokines also promoted MAIT cell death, suggesting that they may contribute to MAIT cell activation and subsequent loss during HDV infection.

PARAGRAPH

These results suggest that chronic HDV infection engages the MAIT cell compartment causing activation, functional impairment, and subsequent progressive loss of MAIT cells as the HDV-associated liver disease progresses.

