10.1016/j.jasrep.2018.11.018

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Reconstructing body mass of the Australian dingo (Canis dingo) from two simple measurements of the hard palate

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Body mass and size have long been linked to various ecological, physiological and evolutionary factors (Gittleman, 1985), with the aim to understand an animal or species' life history, general appearance, metabolic needs, and bite force (Damuth and MacFadden, 1990).

In the Canidae specifically, knowledge of body mass can reveal information about geographic variation and adaptation, as well as the life histories and roles of canids in past human societies, particularly during domestication (Losey et al., 2015; Losey et al., 2017).

Changes in body size across time and space may offer an insight into such aspects as geographic variation, changes to climate, and resource availability, such as the size of prey.

PARAGRAPH

Various methods have explored the relationship between skeletal dimensions and body mass in vertebrates (Churchill et al., 2014; Legendre and Roth, 1988; Pagels and Blem, 1984; Wroe et al., 2003).

In the Canidae, there is a large body of literature on body mass predictions involving cranial and postcranial characters (Andersson, 2004; Anyonge, 1993; Creighton, 1980; Losey et al., 2015; Losey et al., 2017; Legendre and Roth, 1988; Palmqvist et al., 2002; van Valkenburgh, 1990), but the majority are largely based on the cranial and mandibular.

Postcranial measurements are more accurate than those of the cranium for reconstruction of body mass because of their weight bearing abilities such as in the femur or humerus.

That is, the forces acting on the limbs are directly proportional to the weight the limbs support (Alexander, 1989, 1991; Janis, 1990; Losey et al., 2017).

As a result, postcranial remains are strongly correlated with body mass.

However, it is often the case that postcranial remains cannot be found in archaeological excavations or they cannot be matched to the skull in cases where there is more than one burial (Janis, 1990).

PARAGRAPH

In general, older museum collections comprise mainly skulls of larger mammals, while postcranial skeletons were discarded as being considered of less scientific importance.

For these reasons, numerous studies propose methods to reconstruct body weight from measurements of the skull (Churchill et al., 2014; Legendre and Roth, 1988; Pagels and Blem, 1984; Wroe et al., 2003).

Losey et al. (2015) reconstructed body mass from the skeletal remains of Canidae, specifically, dogs and wolves.

They presented simple linear regressions of body mass for each of the 20 cranial (neurocranium and splanchnocranium) and 20 mandibular (including dentition) dimensions taken from the work by von den Driesch (1976) and Morey (1992).

Included in these 40 dimensions were the length of lower molar (M1), and the length of the palate.

This produced a useful method, however, did not include multivariate regressions.

The inclusion of multivariate regressions could potentially lower errors, and thus increase accuracy of weight estimation because as each correlated variable is added to a multivariate regression, it decreases or stabilises the error of prediction.

The higher the correlations, the lower the error.

In another study, van Valkenburgh (1990) proposed a method of mass estimation based on only four dimensions.

These included the total skull length, occiput to the anterior premaxilla, head to body length and the length of the lower molar (M1).

van Valkenburgh's study was based on 72 species divided into Families, one of which was Canidae.

However, the Australian dingo was excluded from this sample.

One minor issue with the regressions used by both van Valkenburgh (1990) and Losey et al. (2015) is that they were determined on logged values, which may create unnecessary mathematical steps, compared to methods using unlogged values.

PARAGRAPH

Typically, the size of the neurocranium is a direct representation of brain size, and thus its measure can be used for determining brain size in collections where the brain cannot be measured (Manjunath, 2002).

However, measurements of the neurocranium to reconstruct body mass cannot be used in studies of encephalisation (the relationship between brain and body size) when the same measurements of the skull are used as a representative of brain size.

This is because the use of neurocranium measurements to reconstruct body mass as well as to estimate brain size produces circular reasoning, heavily biasing results.

As the postcranial skeleton and mandible are rarely found in archaeological excavations and/or museum collections, methods which estimate body mass should concentrate on the crania and maxillary dentition.

However, due to the vast number of studies which investigate encephalisation and/or brain size as well as body size (Smith et al., 2018; Damasceno et al., 2013; Finarelli, 2008; Gittleman, 1986; Röhrs, 1986; Bronson, 1979), methods which use the neurocranium are deemed inappropriate.

Thus, methods which use the splanchnocranium and maxillary dentition alone should be investigated.

PARAGRAPH

The aim of the current paper was to estimate the body mass of the Australian dingo (Canis dingo Meyer 1793; Order Carnivora: Family Canidae) from splanchnocranial dimensions and maxillary dentition using both simple and multivariate regression equations.

The usefulness of the upper molar and palate width as a predictor of body mass has also not been investigated in previous methods for Canidae (Losey et al., 2015; van Valkenburgh, 1990).

The dingo is Australia's largest extant, terrestrial carnivore, and is reasonably abundant over much of mainland Australia.

It was the only native representative of its genus, and the largest non-human terrestrial eutherian found in Australia from its arrival circa 5–10,000 years before present until European arrival in the late 18th Century (Macintosh, 1964; Savolainen et al., 2004; Oskarsson et al., 2011; Sacks et al., 2013; Smith and Savolainen, 2015; Cairns and Wilton, 2016; Fillios and Taçon, 2016; Cairns et al., 2017).

The dingo has been geographically isolated from all other species of Canis for millenia, and admixture has only been possible because of recent human activity.

This makes the dingo unique among canids globally, where there has been a long history of introgression between wild and domestic canids (Fan et al., 2016).

PARAGRAPH

Dingoes have survived as a free ranging canid in Australia for millennia, subject to the rigours of natural selection, thriving in all terrestrial habitats, and largely in the absence of human intervention or aid.

It does not display the same ranges and abilities of tolerance in all relevant ecological variables, and thus occupies a niche that cannot be readily occupied by other closely related populations.

The dingo can be distinguished from the domestic dog in relation to genetics (Wilton, 2001; Stephens et al., 2015), phenotype (Gollan, 1982; Crowther et al., 2014; Parr et al., 2016), behaviour (see Smith, 2015 and references therein), and reproductive biology and behaviour (Lord et al., 2013).

Thus, given the dingoes' uniqueness, and important ecological and historical role in Australia, it is important that a method to reconstruct dingo body weight be developed.

No other study has provided a method to specifically reconstruct body weight of the Australian dingo.

Damasceno et al. (2013) required the estimation of dingo body mass during investigations of bite force, however utilised a generic method which may introduce a high degree of error.

PARAGRAPH

Dingoes are regularly discovered at archaeological sites across the Australian continent (for summary of locations see Smith and Savolainen, 2015, and Fillios and Taçon, 2016), with several dingo specimens dated as old as 3500 years (Mulvaney et al., 1964; Macintosh, 1964; Martin, 1973; Milham and Thompson, 1976; Smith, 1982; Gollan, 1984).

The reconstruction of dingo body size is useful for investigating temporal variation in the size of dingoes across the Australian continent, and through time, particularly in the context of human activity.

For example, dingo body mass may reveal insight into the dingoes arrival to Australia (perhaps alongside humans), and identify regions where dingoes may have been influenced by human activity (e.g. with Indigenous Australians- Smith and Litchfield, 2009; Fillios and Taçon, 2016).

In the context of interactions with humans and their ecological role in such interactions, the impact of widescale and historical lethal control (Philip, 2018) may have led to rapid phenotypic change (Hendry and Kinnison, 1999; Hendry et al., 2008).

For instance, Colman (2015) found that poisoning with fluoroacetate (1080) resulted in a selection bias towards larger dingoes in areas that were baited compared to non-baited areas.

The human introduction of prey species archaeological specimens (such as rabbits, rodents, cats and foxes; van Eeden et al., 2018) and habitat destruction may reveal similar patterns in the dingo body size over time, as would changes in environmental factors (such as temperature, rainfall, longitude and latitude).

The estimation of body mass can be useful for distinguishing dingoes from other canids (such as domestic dogs), historically using specimens that date the European settlement of Australia (Crowther et al., 2014), and with modern canids, where any current day ‘wild dog’ specimens found outside the range of typical dingo body weight is likely to be a dog rather than a dingo.

Lastly, the method is useful for evaluating degrees of encephalisation of dingoes among museum samples (Smith et al., 2018).

SECTION

Methods

PARAGRAPH

A total of 128 Canis dingo crania were measured using vernier calipers, they consisted of 64 male and 64 female skulls.

The sample was collected from the National Research Collections Australia (n = 117) and the South Australian Museum (n = 11).

Only crania of mature adult individuals who had body mass recorded were included.

The following three dimensions were measured on all specimens: palate length (PL), palate width (PW) and the length of the first upper molar (M1).

These measurements were chosen as they are not often subjected to damage, and as part of the crania, they are found in archaeological collections and do not need to be matched to other parts of remains to prove useful.

A visual representation of these measurements is presented in Fig. 1.

The length of M1 is defined as the longest distance between the mesial and distal margins of the first molar on the buccal side.

Palate length is defined as the maximum distance from the caudal nasal spine of the palatine bone and the most rostral point of the maxilla, between the two central incisors (prosthion) in the midline.

The palate width is defined as the widest dimension between the junctions of fourth premolars and first molars on the lingual side, at the carnassial complex.

In all cases, the dimensions were measured to the nearest millimetre.

PARAGRAPH

Simple linear regressions were calculated to show the relationship between each of the cranial dimensions and body mass.

Multivariate regressions were then calculated to improve the accuracy of mass estimates when more than one dimension can be measured.

For all regressions, the standard error of the estimate (SEE) and percentage prediction error (PPE) was calculated to show the accuracy of estimates.

The percentage prediction error (PPE) was used by both Losey et al. (2015) and van Valkenburgh (1990).

Therefore, it is calculated in the current paper for ease of comparison.

The percentage prediction error is calculated as:PPE=observed body mass−predicted body mass/predicted body mass∗100

PARAGRAPH

Following Losey et al. (2015) PPE was calculated for individual specimens and the average value of these percentages was reported for the total sample.

SECTION

Results

PARAGRAPH

The means and standard deviations for males and females separately for all the variables measured are presented in Table 1.

On average, males were larger than females in all variables.

The following sexual dimorphism index (SDI) was used to calculate the variability of measurements of the crania between males and females in this sample:MALES−FEMALESMALES∗100

PARAGRAPH

Overall sexual dimorphism accounts for approximately 5.2% of variability between males and females.

The highest variation between sexes was seen in the palate width at 5.98% while the lowest was seen in the length of the M1 at 4.60%, palate length showed a similar result with 4.89%.

These results are comparable with previous studies which report overall sexual dimorphism in the dingo at 5.5% (Newsome et al., 1980; Newsome and Corbett, 1982).

Males had an average difference of 2.75 kg (18.9%) in body mass from females.

PARAGRAPH

Relationships between body mass and the measured dimensions among males and females were explored separately (Fig. 2).

Although scatters of male and female points do not overlap entirely, individual regressions of mass and the cranial dimensions among males and females did not differ significantly in constants (intercepts), coefficients (slopes) or correlation coefficients for palate length and palate width.

There was a significant difference in the M1 measurement.

Given that only one variable showed a significant difference, males and females were combined for all further analyses.

This is also justified by the fact that sex of an unknown dingo skull cannot be reliably estimated from cranial morphology as sexual dimorphism is low (Newsome et al., 1980).

PARAGRAPH

Neither van Valkenburgh (1990) or Losey et al. (2015) have investigated the usefulness of upper maxillary molar or the width of the palate in determining body mass.

Thus, these regressions could not be applied to the current sample to establish their usefulness in mass prediction of the Australian dingo.

However, Losey et al. (2015) measured the length of the palate and reported a significant correlation with body mass (R2 = 0.93) in dogs and (R2 = 0.66) in wolves.

The regressions for palate length reported by Losey et al. (2015) were applied to the current sample of dingoes.

Losey et al. (2015) reported an average PPE of 13.79% for dogs, when applied to dingoes, the average PPE doubled to 26.7%.

For wolves, Losey et al. (2015) reported an average PPE of 15.29%, when applied to dingoes, the average PPE increased to 21.23%.

Further demonstrating the need for specific regression equations for Australian Dingoes.

PARAGRAPH

Measurements of the palate were both positively correlated with body mass: palate length (R2 = 0.46) and palate width (R2 = 0.44).

No correlation was found between body mass and the length of the first upper molar with an R2 value of 0.07.

The correlations between body mass and both dimensions of the palate are significant (p ≤ 0.0001).

PARAGRAPH

Simple linear regression equations calculated separately for each of the three cranial dimensions together with their standard errors are shown in Table 2.

This has an advantage when only one measurement can be taken from a specimen.

When using the simple linear regressions to predict body mass, the largest standard error of the estimate (SEE) calculated was 1.98 kg for the first upper molar and as expected, the percentage prediction error (PPE) for the M1 also ranked highest of all regressions at 12.38%.

The lowest SEE was 1.50 kg for palate length and a similar 1.54 kg for palate width.

The PPE calculated for palate length was 9.53% and for palate width 9.33% (approximately 10%).

Palate length would yield slightly better results for mass estimation as the correlation is higher even though the PPE is slightly greater than it is for palate width.

However, using palate width would still give an accurate result with an error of approximately 10% or 1.5 kg.

PARAGRAPH

Cranial dimensions were then combined and multivariate regression equations produced to predict body mass (Table 3).

All possible combinations were explored as this method was designed for use with fragmented remains.

An equation which only included palate length and palate width explained the greatest part of variance in mass: 0.58 R2.

There was no statistical difference when comparing the R2 calculated using palate length and palate width against the R2 calculated using all three dimensions confirming that the length of M1 does not significantly contribute to prediction of body mass.

The lowest standard error estimate of 1.34 kg for palate length and palate width combined was equal to that estimated from the regression which included all three variables (Table 3).

Likewise, the percentage prediction error (PPE) calculated from the combined palate length and palate width regression (8.05%) was the same as that calculated using all three dimensions (Table 3).

This reinforces the finding that the length of the M1 does not contribute to the regression equation, because it has such a low correlation with body mass.

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

This study presents reliable and efficient equations for predicting body mass in the dingo using two measurements of the palate (splanchnocranial elements).

We recommend this be used for future studies using skeletal remains of the dingo in museum samples.

By reconstructing body mass from these skeletal elements of dingoes, studies can explore further their biology, behaviour, encephalisation and domestication events by taking advantage of larger and older museum samples.

Importantly, dimensions measured in this study were not part of the neurocranium, mandible or the postcranial skeleton effectively increasing the sample size as the likelihood of being able to measure these dimensions is good since the palate is less likely to be destroyed or unavailable in museum collections than other skeletal elements (Janis, 1990).

Using measurements from the palate also eliminates the conundrum of predicting body mass from neurocranial dimensions which invalidate studies of encephalisation.

This method may be suitable for predictions of body mass in other canids, however this will need to be tested.

PARAGRAPH

Both van Valkenburgh (1990) and Losey et al. (2015) used the length of the lower first molar, obtained from the mandible due to its importance as part of the carnassial complex, the reason being that due to its function in bite-force it may therefore scale with body size.

Both studies reported a poor correlation of M1 with body mass in canines.

PARAGRAPH

In this study, the first molar of the maxillary arch was measured.

In mammals the lower first molar is the first tooth to be calcified in development (prenatally) (Garn et al., 1957; Swindler et al., 1982; Williams and Evans, 1978).

Such early calcification led Losey et al. (2015) to suggest that this tooth not be used as an estimator of body mass, instead using the maxillary molar row. van Valkenburgh (1990),

used the length of the lower molar but found that it was the poorest predictor of body mass when compared to total skull length, occiput to orbit length and head to body length.

Despite these concerns that dentition was a low predictor of body mass, we decided to include the upper first molar in the current study to effectively remove the effects of diet and prenatal growth and as another splanchocranium element.

Yet our findings contribute to the current understanding that dentition is not a good predictor of body mass.

PARAGRAPH

The measurements of the palate were the useful predictors of body mass in this study especially when used in combination.

Therefore, when using cranial measurements to reconstruct body mass, measurements of the palate can be used.

Products of palate length and width (such as multiplying the two) were investigated to see if the correlations were higher than simply adding these two variables to one another as is done in multivariate regressions.

The multiplication of palate length and palate width yielded no better correlation than simply adding them.

PARAGRAPH

Losey et al. (2015) reported a correlation coefficient of 0.93 for palate length and body mass, palate width was not measured and thus cannot be compared.

This correlation using palate length was much higher than that reported in our study (R2 0.68).

However, the percentage prediction error was lower in our dingo sample at 9.53% compared to 13.79% for dogs and wolves as reported by Losey et al. (2015).

This difference in correlation strength may be as a result of Losey et al. (2015) including juveniles in their sample, which increased the ranges of variation and covariance of all variables.

The current study uses only fully mature adults. van Valkenburgh (1990)

noted a similar relationship between members of different families (eg.

Canidae, Felidae, Ursidae, Mustelidae) when comparing members within a family (eg.

Canidae), van Valkenburgh (1990) found that the larger the range of variation, the higher the correlation, however, correlation is not always a good indicator of the strength of a bivariate relationship. van Valkenburgh (1990)

suggested using the standard error as a means of determining the effectiveness of the prediction method.

The method proposed in the current study has lower standard errors when compared to the same dimensions measured by Losey et al. (2015) and van Valkenburgh (1990).

PARAGRAPH

Here we present a simple method based on two measurements of the hard palate for use in the reconstruction of body mass of dingoes.

Measurements of the palate have strong correlations with body mass and thus provide low errors when used in regression analysis.

Two measurements of the hard palate alone, provide lower errors and a simplified statistical regression equation for predicting body mass of the dingo when compared to methods which use a lot more measurements.

As such, the method we propose s preferred based on its simplicity.