10.1016/j.jasrep.2018.09.029

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Histological age assessment in a prehispanic Maya sample from Xcambó, Yucatan, Mexico: Benefits and limitations

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

The estimation of age at death in human remains is one of the most fundamental steps undertaken in archaeological and forensic casework.

In archaeological contexts, macroscopic methods are often preferred over microscopic ones, for many reasons.

First, invasive techniques are often avoided or not permitted due to ethnical concerns, and/or to preserve sample integrity.

Second, labs are often not equipped with microscopes and stations for the preparation and analysis of thin sections.

Third, histological assessment takes more time, and requires additional experience.

Fourth, histological approaches often focus on skeletal regions indicating pathological changes (Schultz, 2001), while standardized healthy bone sections are necessary for age estimations.

Finally, and most importantly within the context of the present study, current literature focusses on the refinement of regression formulae, with little published about their applicability in archaeological contexts (see Pfeiffer and Pinto, 2012).

PARAGRAPH

Consequently, the application of histological regressions for the estimation of age at death in archaeological samples is uncommon.

In some circumstances and in specific geographic regions, however, microscopic age at death assessment is advantageous.

This is especially true when remains are often fragmented due to weathering and climate.

Under poor preservation, bone regions typically used for macroscopic analysis, i.e. pubic symphysis (Brooks and Suchey, 1990), mid thoracic sternal rib end (Iscan, 1993; Iscan et al., 1984) or the auricular surface (Lovejoy et al., 1985), are often eroded, destroyed and/or missing.

Regions of dense long bone diaphyses, however, are often found better preserved.

In addition, during the analysis of important dignitaries, histological assessment of age can add necessary detail.

An example for such a case is Janaab'Pakal from Palenque, Chiapas.

Epigraphic inscriptions indicated Janaab'Pakal was 80 years old when he passed away, however, macroscopic methods suggested an estimate of 40–50 years.

To investigate this discrepancy, Stout and Streeter (2004, 2006) microscopically assessed Janaab'Pakal's age and found that histologically his remains proposed a minimum age at death of 52 years old and possibly much older, supporting the biographic information derived from inscriptions.

More recently, Suzuki and Tiesler (2016) report a combined macro- and microscopic age at death analysis of three Maya dignitaries from the Mexican sites Palenque, Dzibanché, and Chiapa de Corzo.

Similarly, one of the individuals showed a relatively high deviation between macroscopically and microscopically assessed age at death with the latter suggesting a more advanced age, again aiding demographic reconstructions.

In a larger prehispanic Maya sample, Tiesler et al. (2008) examined 18 individuals employing three different age regression formulae derived from Stout and Paine (1992), Cho et al. (2002), and Valencia et al. (2010), the same ones used in the present approach.

Cho et al.'s (2002) equations resulted in higher estimates than the two others did.

Since Cho et al.'s (2002) reconstructions also diverged strongest from macroscopic ages, Tiesler et al. (2008) concluded Cho et al.'s (2002) formulae may result in less reliable age at death estimates for prehispanic Maya populations (see also Hurtado Cen et al., 2006).

PARAGRAPH

In general, more explorations of histological age regressions in archaeological samples are necessary to gain a better understanding of their applicability.

The fact that bone growth and development varies within and between populations, past and present, and is dependent on several factors, such as activity levels, genetics, nutrition, and hormones, adds complexity and bias in the histological applications in archaeology.

But we believe these complexity and bias could be getting cleared though detailed comparisons of population samples and the patterns of deviation observable between estimates resulting from different methods, microscopic and macroscopic.

For this purpose, the present study uses a test sample of 57 individuals from the prehispanic Classic coastal site Xcambó, Yucatan, Mexico, and assesses age at death using four age regression formulae derived from Stout and Paine (1992), Cho et al. (2002), and Valencia et al. (2010).

We additionally assess the variability of standard histomorphometric variables related to age.

These include the variables relative cortical area (CA/TA%), total cortical area (TA), cortical area (CA), as well as osteon population density (OPD), and cross-sectional osteon size (Or.Ar.).

We compare these across macroscopic age groups, sex, between prehispanic and modern Maya (Valencia et al., 2010), as well as with data published by Cho et al. (2002) for their African and European American sample.

We then compare the four microscopically derived age reconstructions with macroscopic age estimates (data derived from Tiesler et al., 2005).

Our aim is to provide comparative information that will increase the applicability of histological age at death assessment methods in prehistoric Mesoamerican samples specifically, and in archaeological samples in general.

SECTION

Background – histological assessment of age at death

PARAGRAPH

Microscopic age at death assessment relies on the continuous, lifelong process of bone remodeling, or turnover, a process necessary for the maintenance of a bone's mechanical integrity and microfracture repair (Parfitt, 2002, 2003; Stout, 1989; Stout and Crowder, 2012; Takahashi and Frost, 1966).

During remodeling, bone cells work in a coordinated manner, removing and replacing small amounts of bone within previously existing tissue in a fine-tuned process, maintaining its requirements for vascularization.

The result is a carefully arranged Haversian network, comprised of longitudinally oriented tubular structures called Haversian systems or secondary osteons, present in a long bone's diaphysis.

PARAGRAPH

In microscopic cross-sections, Haversian systems appear as distinct, quantifiable circular structures.

Since bone is a hard tissue, their relative position to each other can be interpreted stratigraphically, with intact cross-sections of secondary osteons indicating more recently developed osteons, and fragmentary secondary osteons indicating partial resorption and replacement of a relatively older system.

The number of intact secondary osteons and fragments in a defined optical field can be used to calculate histomorphometric variables such as a region's osteon population density (OPD), the number of secondary osteons and secondary osteonal fragments accumulated through remodeling over time.

PARAGRAPH

Relatively consistent developmental remodeling rates allow for the development of regression formulae employed for the estimation of age at death, that provide accurate results within known error margins.

Several skeletal elements, such as the femur, the rib, and the occipital bone have been successfully employed for this purpose (see Cho et al., 2002; Ericksen, 1991; Goliath et al., 2016; Kerley, 1965; Kerley and Ubelaker, 1978; Stout and Paine, 1992; Stout et al., 1994, 1996; Thompson, 1979).

PARAGRAPH

Due to the effects of modeling drift, the lateral growth and shape adjustments of a long bone's diaphysis during growth (Maggiano, 2012; Maggiano et al., 2010; Streeter, 2005), early tissues are dominated by primary bone deposition and patterns of resorption.

It is not until around age 14 that rib tissue starts to be consistently occupied by secondary osteons; secondary tissue is effectivity “born” around that age (Streeter, 2005, 2012; Streeter and Stout, 2003; Wu et al., 1970).

Eventually, around the 5th or 6th decade of life, cortical bone in the rib has been turned over so much that the increase in secondary osteons stagnates, despite continuous remodeling.

A remodeling asymptote is reached, meaning newly developing osteons replace older ones, without increasing the total number of osteons any more (Frost, 1987).

Because of this ontological variation, histological age assessment generally provides less accurate estimates for individuals below 14 and above 50.

Some other limitations of histological age assessment lay in the fact that remodeling rates vary dependent on factors such as physical activity, hormones, bone metabolic diseases, genetic effects, nutrition, and possibly climate.

These factors can vary between populations, individuals, and sometimes even within a lifetime, making them difficult to account for (Robling and Stout, 2008).

PARAGRAPH

One method used to reduce bias caused by varying degrees of physical activity and/or mechanical strain is to use skeletal segments less susceptible to loading.

While some of the most original histological age regressions were developed for weight bearing lower limb bones (Kerley, 1965; Kerley and Ubelaker, 1978; Thompson, 1979), other authors have since used ribs or clavicles.

The earliest rib age regression formula was published by Stout and Paine (1992), developed on an African American and European American autopsy series.

Another strategy often followed to reduce bias caused by lifestyle/activity-related and/or genetic influences is to develop ethnicity- or region-adjusted equations.

Cho et al. (2002), for example, offer ethnicity-specific formulae for modern African American and European American samples as well as formulae for samples of indeterminate ancestry, especially important for their application in modern forensic casework.

For the current study a region-adjusted formula published by Valencia et al., 2010 (see also Valencia, 2007), developed on a modern known age at death sample of Maya descent from autopsies performed by the Servicio Médico Forense (SEMEFO) of the State of Yucatan, Mexico, is of specific interest and has shown to successfully increase accuracy for a modern Maya test sample (see Valencia et al., 2010).

SECTION

Materials and methods

PARAGRAPH

Materials for this study were derived from the Classic Maya site Xcambó.

Fortunate conditions at the site resulted in a uniquely well-preserved skeletal population sample, housed at the Autonomous University of Yucatan, Merida, Mexico, offering a unique opportunity to compare histological age estimations in the prehispanic Maya context.

PARAGRAPH

During the Classic Period (250–700 CE), Xcambó presented an important salt production center and maritime port for long-distance trade (Sierra, 2004).

There were about six hundred burials excavated between 1996 and 2000, many of which are in an exceptional state of preservation.

A wide range of archaeological and bioarchaeological studies have been performed on this skeletal collection (e.g. Cetina and Sierra, 2003; Cucina and Tiesler, 2003; Cucina et al., 2011a, 2011b; Ortega Muñoz et al., 2018; Maggiano et al., 2008, 2010; Méndez et al., 2009; Sierra, 2004; Sierra et al., 2014; Tiesler, 2005; Tiesler et al., 2005; Suzuki et al., 2009; Wanner et al., 2007), providing a wealth of information about these coastal inhabitants' demography, activity patterns, occupations, divisions of labor, nutrition, pathologies, and trade relationships, which extended towards Guatemala, Belize and Veracruz.

PARAGRAPH

From the 600 specimens, a sub-sample was selected according to several criteria.

First, individuals had to be at least 15 years old according to macroscopic age at death estimations (mid-point of the macroscopic age range was considered), since histological age assessment is inaccurate for individuals below that age.

Second, the sixth rib was chosen for analyses because of its high prevalence.

Recent studies confirm that the fourth, fifth, and the sixth rib can be used interchangeably for histomorphometric approaches and remodeling rates do not vary significantly between these three skeletal elements (Crowder and Rosella, 2007).

Individuals missing the sixth rib were not included.

The left rib was preferred when preservation permitted; if not, the right rib was used.

Of 206 selected individuals, 59 specimens were well enough preserved for histological assessment.

Two additional individuals were excluded because sex could not be determined macroscopically, resulting in a final sample size of 57 individuals (see Table 1 for age and sex distribution).

PARAGRAPH

Macroscopically estimated age and sex was drawn from Tiesler et al. (2005), who employed multiple indicator analyses to achieve the most accurate macroscopic assessments possible to them.

Depending on preservation status, priority was given by Tiesler et al. (2005) to the analyses of the auricular surface and the pubic symphysis using standards provided by Lovejoy et al. (1985), Suchey et al. (1984, 1986) and Brooks and Suchey (1990).

When preservation permitted, the Transition Analysis (Bethard, 2005; Boldsen et al., 2002, see also Milner and Boldsen, 2012) was calculated too.

Finally, degenerative changes, like dental wear and osteoarthritis, were also considered (Chi Keb, 2006; Chi Keb and Tiesler, 2009; Chi Keb et al., 2007; Hurtado Cen, 2004; Segura Osorio, 2009).

Since macroscopic age assessment provides an age range rather than a direct number estimate, the current investigation uses the midpoint of these ranges as a representative macroscopic age for comparison with histologically derived estimates.

PARAGRAPH

Microscopic slides were prepared following standard preparation protocols provided by Tiesler et al. (2006), adjusted for the specific climate conditions of the Yucatan region.

Two centimeter sections were embedded in BIODUR®, cut into thin layers (1 mm thick) with an Isomet diamond saw, then mounted on microscope slides, hand-sanded, polished to a thickness of 50–60 μm, and cover-slipped.

Two cross-sections per individual were prepared and assessed and all results represent means of the two combined slides.

PARAGRAPH

The number of intact secondary osteons and fragmentary secondary osteons per microscopic field was quantified using the microscopic point-count technique (Merz reticule, for standard definition of variables see Stout and Paine, 1992, and Streeter, 2004).

Variables were assessed across the rib's cross-section in alternating fields (checker-board pattern; see Stout and Paine, 1992).

Assessment took place under polarized light and 20× magnification, using a Leica® DM EP microscope.

PARAGRAPH

Osteon population density (OPD) was calculated as the number of secondary osteons and fragments per area.

Per sample, osteon cross-sectional area or osteon size (On.Ar.)

of at least 25 (and up to 50) intact secondary osteons was measured using point-count technique (cf. Streeter, 2004).

This method was chosen because high resolution scanners, permitting digitalized measurements of secondary osteon size, were not available at our lab.

PARAGRAPH

Rib cross-sectional total area (TA) and medullary area (MA) were measured in Image J® (https://imagej.nih.gov/ij/).

The two measurements were used to calculate cortical area (CA) of each section (CA = TA-MA), and the relative percent cortical area (CA/TA%), as a standardized measure for bone mass.

Mean TA, MA, CA/TA%, OPD, and On.Ar.

were plotted in line graphs for all individuals and by sex and per age group, in order to evaluate their variability.

Individuals were divided into five age groups, using the midpoints of macroscopic age estimates, chosen in 10-year intervals, ensuring individuals were relatively evenly distributed across them (see Table 1).

PARAGRAPH

Microscopic age was estimated using the following equations:Stout and Paine1992:113,Table2:Age=ExpOPD×0.050877+2.343Valenciaetal.2010:474,Algorithm7:Age=10.258784×ExpOPDx0.048198Choetal.Formula12002:18,Example4:Age=37.982+1.400OPD–670.138On.Ar.,Choetal.Formula22002:18,Example3:Age=29.524+1.56∗OPD+4.786×CA/TA−592.899×On.Ar.

PARAGRAPH

Non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis test was employed to test for differences between males and females for the histomorphometric variables.

Spearman's Rank Correlation was used to analyze the relationship between variables and age, non-parametric Wilcoxon test to analyze differences between estimates deriving from the employment of the different macroscopic and microscopic methods.

All statistical tests were performed in SPSS® Version 25.

SECTION

Results

SECTION

Relative cortical area (CA/TA%), total cortical area (TA), cortical area (CA)

PARAGRAPH

CA/TA% is about 10% to 15% higher in females throughout all (see Fig. 1).

According to Kruskal-Wallace, the difference between male and female CA/TA% is statistically significant (p = 0.028).

CA/TA% is highest in our youngest age group (15–25), both in males and females, lowers towards the third decade and then remains similarly low.

Spearmen rank correlation shows a significant negative relationship between CA/TA% and age (Spearman's Rho: −0.361, p = 0.005).

Mean TA and CA is high throughout our sample (see Table 1) when compared with results published by Stout and Paine (1992), Cho et al. (2002), and Valencia et al. (2010) (see Table 2 for comparison).

Mean CA/TA% in the prehispanic Xcambó sample (42% total, 47% females, 37% males), is considerably higher than mean CA/TA% reported by Valencia et al. (2010) for the modern Maya sample (see Table 2).

For means of TA, CA, and %CA/TA according to age categories and sex, see Table 1.

SECTION

Osteon population density (OPD)

PARAGRAPH

OPD consistently increases across the three youngest age groups, from 15 to 44 years of age, after which it flattens, both in males and females (Fig. 2).

Females show slightly higher averages than males, but this difference is not statistically significant according to Kruskal Wallace test (p = 0.194).

OPD shows a positive significant correlation with age (Spearman's Rho = 0.681, p = 0.000).

Compared to results from previous studies, both the archaeological sample from Xcambó and the modern autopsy series from Xoclán (see Valencia et al., 2010) show relatively high OPDs (see Table 2).

Xcambó mean OPD is 26.8 and modern Yucatec Mayans mean OPD is 28.8 (as reported by Valencia et al., 2010), whereas the reported mean OPDs by Cho et al. (2002) were between 21.0 and 23.0.

For mean OPD according to age categories and sex, see Table 2.

SECTION

Osteon cross-sectional area (On.Ar.)

PARAGRAPH

On.Ar.

in our sample shows a peak in males and females of our youngest age group (15–25) (Fig. 2).

It is lower and relatively similar in all other age groups.

According to Kruskal-Wallace test, the difference between males and females is not statistically significant (p = 0.083).

The relationship between age and On.Ar.

is a significantly negative correlation (Spearman Rho = −0.372, p = 0.004).

On.Ar.

in our prehispanic sample does not show any remarkable differences with results reported by Valencia et al. (2010) or Cho et al. (2002) (see Table 2).

For means On.Ar.

in all age categories and according to sex, see Table 2 (Fig. 3).

SECTION

Comparing age estimates

PARAGRAPH

Comparing all four microscopic age estimates shows a mean difference between the results derived from Valencia et al.'s (2010) and Stout and Paine's (1992) formulae between 1 and 9 years (see Tables 3, 4 and Fig. 4).

This difference is statistically significant according to Wilcoxon Test (p ≤ 0.000, see Table 4).

The two different formulae provided by Cho et al.'s (2002) result in similar age estimates across our sample (see Table 3, Fig. 4).

However, they diverge from estimates derived through Stout and Paine (1992; net difference = 13 years, Table 4, p = 0.000) and Valencia et al. (2010) (net difference = 16 years, Table 4, p = 0.000).

PARAGRAPH

When comparing microscopic and macroscopic age estimates through non-parametric paired Wilcoxon ranked test, neither Stout and Paine's (1992, p = 0.163), nor Valencia et al.'s (2010, p = 0.248) formulae results in statistically different ages (see also Table 4).

Both, Stout and Paine's (1992) as well as Valencia et al.'s (2010) estimates tend to be higher than macroscopic ages in the younger half of our sample (up to around age 40), and lower for individuals above 40.

In contrast, the difference between macroscopic estimates and results from the two Cho et al. (2002) formulae is statistically significant (p ≤ 0.000 for both).

The application of both Cho et al.'s (2002) formulae resulted in higher age estimates across all age groups, with a net mean difference of about 15.5 years between macroscopically and microscopically derived age estimates (see Table 4).

This is twice as high as the net difference resulting from a comparison of Stout and Paine's (1992) and Valencia et al.'s (2010) application with macroscopic estimates, which is around 8 years, only (see Table 4).

For mean ages at death, standard deviations, and minima and maxima for all four microscopic and the macroscopic method (see Table 3).

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

The use of histological methods for the archaeological estimation of age at death is rare despite that under some circumstances, this can be beneficial for the reconstruction of biographic and demographic data.

One important reason for the scarcity of histological age reconstructions in archaeology is that their applicability is questionable due to differential biocultural impacts on bone, when modern reference populations are compared with archaeological samples.

The modern known age at death reference samples used for the development of age regression formulae can possibly exhibit quite different genetic, nutritional, hormonal and/or physical activity characteristics.

PARAGRAPH

In order to investigate the applicability of histological regression formulae in this archaeological sample, the present approach employs four age assessment regressions, (Cho et al., 2002; Stout and Paine, 1992; Valencia et al., 2010).

We analyze the pattern of deviation between microscopic age estimations deriving from these formulae, and between microscopic and macroscopic age estimates in a prehispanic sample (n = 57) from the Classic Maya site Xcambó, Yucatan, Mexico.

To gain further insights into the variables employed for the histological reconstruction of age at death, since microstructural variability between modern and archaeological samples could confound outcomes of age at death reconstructions, we additionally explore histomorphometric variables in the sixth rib within our sample, as well as between our sample and results reported for the reference samples used by Cho et al. (2002) and Valencia et al. (2010).

Primarily aiming to gain a better understanding of the applicability of histological age regression formulae for prehispanic Maya populations, our results could provide implications for their application in other archaeological samples, as well.

SECTION

Cortical area

PARAGRAPH

The cross-sectional area of a bone is a reflection of its bone mass, and therefore its robusticity.

The size of the cross-sectional area affects a bone's osteon population density (OPD), the number of secondary osteons and osteonal fragments per measured area, which is the most important variable employed in all histological age at death regression formulae.

Unstandardized mean cortical area (CA) is high in our prehispanic sample, when compared with results published by Cho et al. (2002) and Valencia et al. (2010) (see Table 2).

This results in a considerably higher standardized relative cortical area (CA/TA%, see Table 2) for the Maya from Xcambó, indicating a comparatively higher overall bone mass in the rib and therefore a high degree of robusticity.

PARAGRAPH

Several factors can affect the development of bone mass, such as hormones, genes, nutrition, and physical activity.

While peak bone mass (the maximum amount of bone developed in life) is suggested to be genetically determined to some degree (Richman et al., 2001; Tanner, 1978), total achieved CA, total area (TA) and especially the relative amount of cortical bone (reflected by CA/TA%), are known to strongly depend on the level of physical activity.

Accordingly, high degrees of physical activity, causing continuous dynamic bending of a long bone, increase the amount of appositional growth during skeletal maturation (Frost and Schönau, 2000; Gosman, 2012; Kemper et al., 2000; Recker et al., 1992; Skedro, 2012).

PARAGRAPH

Previous cross-sectional analyses of other skeletal elements (humeri and femora) from the Xcambó sample indicate high degrees of robusticity reflected in both extremities, upper and lower body, interpreted as the result of elevated loading associated with physically demanding lifestyles at the site (Maggiano et al., 2008; Wanner et al., 2007).

Rib loading patterns during shoulder girdle and respiratory muscle activity are not well known, and often ribs are considered less affected by activity induced mechanical stress.

Future analyses of rib loading patterns could help better identify the possible effects of activity levels on rib development (see e.g. Crowder and Rosella, 2007), which could be important especially for the application of histological methods developed on modern reference samples in archaeological samples, likely to have been exposed to a more demanding lifestyle, as in the present example.

PARAGRAPH

Interestingly, mean CA/TA% in females exceeds males' in all age groups in the Xcambó sample, up to 15%.

This is an unexpected finding since generally, CA/TA% is reported to be higher in males than in females, both in archaeological and modern human samples, as a result of simple sexual dimorphism (Dupras and Pfeiffer, 1996).

In addition, the reference samples used by Cho et al. (2002) and Valencia et al. (2010) were both male-dominant compared to our sample with a more balanced sex-ratio.

While this is reflected in similarly high TA measurements across samples, CA/TA%, indicating overall achieved bone mass or robusticity, is exceptionally high in females in the Xcambó sample.

Previous bioarchaeological interpretations suggest female skeletal robusticity in Maya populations could be influenced by physically demanding grinding activities on metate and mano.

For example, in Xcambó, high upper limb robusticities and low bilateral asymmetries in females were associated with similar activity patterns (Maggiano et al., 2008; Wanner et al., 2007; Marchi et al., 2011).

While important to mention that occupational spectra are more diverse than often illustrated, the exceptionally high CA/TA% in the ribs of the female Xcambó sample is an important finding and should be further evaluated in future analyses of activity patterns.

SECTION

Osteon population density

PARAGRAPH

OPD is the most important variable for the histological reconstruction of age at death, and the only variable employed in all four formulae employed in the present study.

Remodeling is a lifelong process, resulting in a continuous accumulation of osteons, and, for this reason, permits the development of regression formulae for the estimation of age at death.

Naturally, regressions provide more accurate results when OPD is similar between reference and applied samples.

PARAGRAPH

Generally, OPD follows an expected pattern in our sample, with lower means in younger age groups (males and females), and higher means up to the age group of 45–54 year old individuals, after which OPD remains constant.

In contrast to mean CA/TA%, OPD is similar between modern and archaeological Maya, however, noticeably higher when compared to results reported by Cho et al. (2002) (see Table 2), a difference that could be population-specific and characteristic for individuals of Maya descent.

PARAGRAPH

Similar to cortical area, however, OPD is multi-factor dependent (e.g. Cho et al., 2006; Ericksen and Stix, 1991; Nelson and Villa, 2003; Paine and Brenton, 2006).

For example, elevated levels of physical activity result in higher remodeling rates (Burr et al., 1990; Robling and Stout, 2003; see also Stout, 1982) as well as an increase in the amount of appositional growth (Ruff, 2008).

For this reason, if elevated OPDs in modern and prehispanic Maya were the result of elevated activity levels it is then odd that modern and prehispanic Maya do not display similar CA/TA%.

This may be explained by alternating effects of mechanical strain on bone in different stages of life.

While generally increased levels of mechanical strain activate both, modeling and remodeling, cortical area is more responsive to loading during bone growth, while remodeling is continuously influenced throughout the lifetime of an individual.

Accordingly, the results of modeling and remodeling may reflect activity spectra typical in different stages of life, adding much complexity to bioarchaeological interpretations of occupational activity patterns and possibly influencing histological estimations of age at death.

Activities with an early onset would be expected to have a stronger effect on CA/TA%, while activities either continuously practiced throughout life or with a later onset would be more important for an interpretation of OPD.

PARAGRAPH

In addition to activity, Stout (1983) and Stout and Lueck (1995) suggest a relationship between the dependency on maize and remodeling rates.

Stout (1983) compared Native American foragers to populations with an increasing dependency on agricultural products and found remodeling rates to be consistently higher in the latter (see also Stout, 1989).

Stout and Lueck (1995) showed a continuous increase in remodeling rates from hunter-gatherers, agricultural to modern populations, occurring despite an anticipated decrease in physical activity through more sedentary lifestyles.

These interesting inter-populational adaptational observations could have relevance for the present study as well.

Maya nutrition was and still is highly dependent on maize (Suzuki, 2018; Vargas, 2014; Whittington and Reed, 1997).

Trace element analyses indicate a strong reliance on marine products at the coastal site of Xcambó (Tiesler et al., 2002), however, maize was likely their main calorie source.

This picture could be more complex considering the economic and political changes known to have affected the site (Maggiano et al., 2008).

Future analyses of Maya samples from different regions, coastal and non-coastal, archaeological and modern, could help further identify and separate the diverse effects on OPD and cortical area.

Results reported here emphasize the importance of documenting histomorphometric data in combination with applications of histological age estimation techniques, especially for archaeological samples.

These will become especially valuable the more analyses are available for comparison.

SECTION

Osteon size

PARAGRAPH

The variable osteon cross-sectional area (On.Ar.),

a measurement of the size of an osteon, is employed in the formulae developed by Cho et al. (2002), but not in the formulae developed by Stout and Paine (1992) or Valencia et al. (2010).

For this reason, variation of On.Ar.

could be of interest especially if Cho et al.'s (2002) histological age at death estimates in the Xcambó sample were more different than those derived from the other methods.

In the Xcambó sample, mean On.Ar.

is higher in the youngest age group and consistently lower in all other age groups, a pattern similar in females and males.

Our sample mean closely agrees with results from the two other previously reported analyses (Cho et al., 2002, Valencia et al., 2010, see Table 2).

Additionally, an age-related decrease of osteon size has been reported by other authors as well (Britz et al., 2009; Dominguez and Agnew, 2016; Goliath et al., 2016; Han et al., 2009).

However, some other studies have stated an absence of this relationship (Black et al., 1974; Burr et al., 1990; Pfeiffer et al., 2006) and these inconsistencies could derive from its dependency on physical activity or body size.

Felder et al. (2017), for example, propose On.Ar.

is predominantly determined by the degree of mechanical stress and strain.

This is supported by Britz et al. (2009) who report a relationship between osteon size and body weight in a human femur sample (although age had a greater effect on On.Ar.).

Again, the observations reported here emphasize the importance of an investigation of histomorphometric variables in the context of age at death assessments.

SECTION

Comparing age estimates

PARAGRAPH

We reconstructed age at death through four different histological age regressions: a formula provided by Stout and Paine's (1992), two formulae by Cho et al.'s (2002), and one formula by Valencia et al. (2010).

While Stout and Paine (1992) provided the original formula for the histological estimation of age at death from ribs, developed on an African American and European American autopsy sample, the formulae published by Cho et al. (2002) and Valencia et al. (2010) are the outcome of a common strategy followed in the development of histological age estimation methods.

This strategy is to make regressions more robust against population-specific influences, through the development of ethnicity- or region-adjusted formulae.

PARAGRAPH

Developed using the same reference sample as Stout and Paine (1992) with some additional individuals, Cho et al.'s (2002) work provides formulae specific for modern individuals of African American and European American descent, with important applications in modern forensic casework.

Their work also included formulae for the application in ethnicity-indeterminate individuals.

In comparison to other age at death assessment formulae (employing OPD only), Cho et al.'s (2002) regressions include the additional variables On.Ar., TA, and CA.

For their test samples, their adjusted formulae resulted in more reliable age reconstructions.

PARAGRAPH

Of specific interest to the present approach is also an adjustment made by Valencia et al. (2010), who offer a regression formula specific for individuals of Maya descent, developed on a modern Maya autopsies sample.

Both Valencia et al.'s (2010) formula and Cho et al.'s (2002) comprise adjustments to Stout and Paine's (1992) original regression.

Comparing the age at death estimates resulting from these four formulae, and combining this with an exploration and discussion of the variability of histomorphometric variables, we gain insights into possible causes for deviations and patterns of deviation, useful for the interpretation of histological age at death estimates in archaeological samples, specifically those of Maya descent.

PARAGRAPH

Our results show Stout and Paine's (1992) formula produces slightly higher age at death estimates than Valencia et al.'s (2010), however, differences between the two estimates are small and unpatterned (see Fig. 4).

The two mentioned histological age estimates diverge only slightly from macroscopically derived mid-ages, overestimating younger individuals and underestimating older ones.

A similar trend of deviation between microscopic and macroscopic estimates is reported for a sample from Christ Church, Spitalfields, London (Crowder, 2005; Crowder and Pfeiffer, 2010) suggesting this could be a broad pattern and a methodological artifact.

In contrast, the application of Cho et al.'s (2002) formulae resulted in considerably higher age estimates throughout our sample when compared to both the two other histological estimates and macroscopically derived age at death.

With the mean net difference between age estimates deriving from Cho et al.'s (2002) formulae and macroscopically estimated ages of >15 years, this difference is considerable.

PARAGRAPH

It is interesting to note that our observations resemble trends reported by Tiesler et al. (2008) who show similar deviations between estimates resulting from the same four employed histological regression formulae and macroscopically estimated ages in a sample of 18 individuals from two Classic Maya sites, Calakmul, and Ek Balam.

In both studies, Tiesler et al. (2008) and ours, the formulae developed for modern ethnicity-indetermined samples (Cho et al., 2002) resulted in the most deviating estimates.

Tiesler et al. (2008) suspect this could be due to important ethnicity- or region-specific effects and conclude OPD-only regression formulae provide the most accurate reconstructions of biographic data for prehispanic Maya populations, not further exploring those effects.

It is also outside the scope of the present approach to identify how the within and between population-specific variation of histomorphometric variables might influence histological estimates of age at death, mostly due to the lack of more comparable studies.

Additional future analyses should focus on those issues more closely, and authors should report results in as much detail as possible to permit comparative analyses.

The present attempt does emphasize the potential value of such approaches, with important variation discovered between our archaeological sample and the modern reference samples employed by other authors.

PARAGRAPH

Other alternative paths towards an improvement of histological methods for the estimation of age at death have also been suggested.

Observing patterns of divergence between histological age estimates, Pfeiffer et al. (2016) recently suggested histological approaches to age reconstruction might gain more reliability through the inclusion of more diverse micro- or macrostructural variables (see also Koenigsberg et al., 2008).

As an example, Agnew (2006, see also Agnew and Stout, 2007) found histological age assessments improved in accuracy, and permitted the inclusion of subadult individuals, if diaphyseal length of the rib was also considered during analysis of an archaeological sample from Poland.

This type of approach is encouraging despite that in some contexts differential preservation and fragmentation could reduce the number of individuals assessable in archaeological samples.

Bearing in mind the variability of histomorphometric variables within and between samples, as noted in the present study, adding more variables could be most beneficial when they are chosen to reflect both processes, bone modeling and remodeling, particularly if they are suspected to be subject to different influences.

PARAGRAPH

Histological reconstructions of age at death in archaeological samples are rare; however, the present effort was able to provide insights into the complexity of their application to archaeological material, as well as insights into the multi-factor dependency of histomorphometric variables and its effects on developmental and degenerative processes in bone.

Often these factors are different between archaeological and modern populations.

As the present study shows, continued combined comparisons of microscopic and macroscopic age estimates, including further exploration of microstructural variation could offer valuable tools to improve the accuracy of age at death estimations in archaeological samples.