10.1016/j.jhep.2019.01.007

ABSTRACT

TITLE

A novel HBx genotype serves as a preoperative predictor and fails to activate the JAK1/STATs pathway in hepatocellular carcinoma

PARAGRAPH

Genetic variability in the hepatitis B virus X gene (HBx) is frequently observed and is associated with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) progression.

However, a genotype classification based on the full-length HBx sequence and the impact of genotypes on hepatitis B virus (HBV)-related HCC prognosis remain unclear.

We therefore aimed to perform this genotype classification and assess its clinical impact.

PARAGRAPH

We classified the genotypes of the full-length HBx gene through sequencing and a cluster analysis of HBx DNA from a cohort of patients with HBV-related HCC, which served as the primary cohort (n = 284).

Two independent HBV-related HCC cohorts, a validation cohort (n = 171) and a serum cohort (n = 168), were used to verify the results.

Protein microarray assay analysis was performed to explore the underlying mechanism.

PARAGRAPH

In the primary cohort, the HBx DNA was classified into 3 genotypes: HBx-EHBH1, HBx-EHBH2, and HBx-EHBH3.

HBx-EHBH2 (HBx-E2) indicated better recurrence-free survival and overall survival for patients with HCC.

HBx-E2 was significantly correlated with the absence of liver cirrhosis, a small tumor size, a solitary tumor, complete encapsulation and Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer (BCLC) stage A-0 tumors.

Additionally, HBx-E2 served as a significant prognostic factor for patients with BCLC stage B HCC after hepatectomy.

Mechanistically, HBx-E2 is unable to promote proliferation in HCC cells and normal hepatocytes.

It also fails to activate the Janus kinase 1 (JAK1)/signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3)/STAT5 pathway.

PARAGRAPH

Our study identifies a novel HBx genotype that is unable to promote the proliferation of HCC cells and suggests a potential marker to preoperatively predict the prognosis of patients with BCLC stage B, HBV-associated, HCC.

