10.1016/j.jasrep.2018.11.011

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Compositional analysis and fragmentation of Early Central Petén (Guatemala) figurines

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Like pottery vessels, fired-clay anthropomorphic figurines are typically recovered in fragments.

But figurine breakage has attracted considerable attention from archaeologists, perhaps because their human form prompts unspoken analogies to the violence of dismemberment and decapitation, and interest in the final location of the body parts.

It has been proposed that these objects were intentionally broken and the fragments exchanged to cement local and regional relationships (Chapman, 2000; Talalay, 1987).

Here we examine the applicability of this proposition to the Preclassic lowland Maya, using instrumental neutron activation analysis (INAA) to characterise the chemical composition of 93 anthropomorphic and zoomorphic figurine fragments excavated from two sites.

SECTION

Archaeological and geological background

PARAGRAPH

Maya occupation of the central Petén lakes region of northern Guatemala is best known for its twelfth-through-eighteenth-century Postclassic and Spanish Contact period history and archaeology (for recent reviews, see Jones, 1998; Rice and Rice, 2009, 2016, 2018).

But deep test excavations at sites around the lakes have yielded very early pottery and fired-clay figurines dating to the Terminal Early Preclassic (c. 1100–800 BCE) and Middle Preclassic (c. 800–300 BCE) periods.

Recent studies of these early objects include efforts to understand their production and exchange (e.g., Rice, 2019).

PARAGRAPH

The central Petén lakes occupy a series of basins along a geological fault at about 17.5° N latitude (Fig. 1).

They are closed basins of varying depth, lacking surface outlets.

Small, seasonal streams drain into most of them, especially through their shallow southern shores.

We are particularly interested in Lakes Petén Itzá and Salpetén.

Lake Petén Itzá in the west is the largest of these bodies of water, with a large, deep, northern basin and a much smaller southwestern basin.

Lake Salpetén lies east of the eastern tip of Lake Petén Itzá’s main body, separated from it by a 1.5 km-wide isthmus.

PARAGRAPH

Geologically, central Petén is a marine limestone plateau, with exposed bedrock of Paleocene-Eocene age to the north and Late Cretaceous age south of the lakes' fault line (Hodell et al., 2004).

The limestone is interbedded with strata of dolomite (magnesium carbonate), gypsum (calcium sulfate dihydrate), marl and clays, along with occasional concentrations of silica (chert).

Magnetite nodules and ferric lumps are commonly seen in pottery fabrics.

The waters of Lake Petén Itzá are slightly brackish and alkaline (pH 8), dominated by calcium, magnesium and sulfate ions (Mueller et al., 2009: 134).

Lake Salpetén is also brackish (pH 8.5), with high calcium sulfate from gypsum outcrops (Anselmetti et al., 2007).

PARAGRAPH

The Middle Preclassic and earlier periods in the Maya lowlands traditionally have been difficult to investigate archaeologically, principally because occupational remains lie deeply buried beneath metres of subsequent construction.

Nonetheless, fired clay anthropomorphic figurines have been recovered in early strata at multiple sites in the southern lowlands, including at nearby Motul de San José and Buenavista de San José in the western Lake Petén Itzá basin (Castellanos Cabrera, 2008); Tikal to the north (Halperin, 2013; Laporte and Valdés, 1993); Altar de Sacrificios (Willey, 1972) and Seibal (Willey, 1978) in the Río Pasión region; and especially at Cahal Pech and other sites in western Belize (Cheetham, 1993; DeLance, 2016; Zweig, 2010).

For unknown reasons, figurines are rare or absent in the northern lowlands.

PARAGRAPH

The Terminal Early and Middle Preclassic figurines discussed here were recovered at two sites (see Fig. 1): Nixtun-Ch'ich', a large centre on the western edge of Lake Petén Itzá (Pugh and Rice, 2017; Rice and Pugh, 2017), and Ixlú on the narrow, low-lying isthmus between that lake and Lake Salpetén (Rice and Rice, 2016).

At the former site, characterised by an atypical gridded plan (Pugh and Rice, 2017), excavations were taken through Terminal Early and Middle Preclassic contexts to bedrock in the north–south ‘avenues’ and east–west ‘streets’ defining the grid (Pugh, n.d.), and in some of the quadrilateral blocks with raised platform constructions demarcated by those corridors.

Grid blocks Y, Z, AA and BB comprise the civic-ceremonial core of the site and include two ‘E-Group’ quasi-astronomical structures and a Triadic Group, all characteristic of the Preclassic period.

Ixlú (Rice and Rice, 2016) is much smaller, with excavations in the Main Plaza reaching Middle Preclassic contexts over bedrock.

SECTION

Goals and objectives: fragmentation theory

PARAGRAPH

The lowland Maya Middle Preclassic period witnessed emerging societal complexity: the inception of permanent settlements, agricultural production, social ranking and differentiation, and centralised authority and leadership roles; the creation of specially produced or imported goods as markers of those ranks, ritual places and ideologies; and the invention of political tools such as writing and calendars.

Our interests centre on the interrelated social, political and economic processes involved in this nascent complexity, and on understanding the changing roles of material objects—figurines, in particular—through these tumultuous centuries.

PARAGRAPH

Fired-clay anthropomorphic figurines, generally solid and hand-formed, are found throughout early Mesoamerica.

Interpretations suggest that they primarily modeled females and were used in domestic rituals such as divining to call on the ancestors (e.g., Marcus, 1998).

The figurines from central Petén, by contrast, are typically asexual and ungendered, and appear to have been manipulated in public ritual (Rice, 2019).

PARAGRAPH

One objective of INAA of these objects was to establish a foundation for investigating circulation of Preclassic Maya figurines within the broader framework of ‘fragmentation theory.’

Thirty years ago, a study of a small sample of broken Greek Middle Neolithic anthropomorphic figurine legs mentioned how ‘the purposeful splitting of objects has had a long history … as either a contractual device or as an identifying token … symbolizing an agreement, obligation, friendship, or a common bond’ (Talalay, 1987: 166).

The social, economic or political meaning behind such splitting or breakage may include proof of identity in contracts, legitimizing communications, marital or trade alliances and regional cooperative agreements.

Later, John Chapman (2000) proposed the concept of ‘fragmentation’: that early terracotta figurines in Eurasia were manufactured with the explicit intention of breakage, and the exchange of fragments initiated and cemented (‘enchained’) friendships and alliances.

He (Chapman, 2000: 39; cf. Brittain and Harris, 2010) writes that ‘fragments of objects transmit not only the symbolism of their complete, once-intact form but also the enchained … connotations of past makers and owners.’

This, he concludes, would account for a wide variety of fragmentation behavior that is seen worldwide.

PARAGRAPH

The possibility of intentional fragmentation and exchange can begin to be investigated by characterising the chemical composition of certain ceramic objects and then, through various comparative exercises, identifying probable local versus non-local manufactures.

Comparing the spatial disposition of objects in the same paste compositional groupings can lead to inferences about exchanges that bespeak social and economic transactions.

For example, INAA of Preclassic clay figurines and local pottery from two sites north of the Petén lakes, Uaxactun and Nakbe, revealed that three figurines recovered at the former site were chemically similar to pottery at the latter.

This suggests that the Uaxactun figurines were likely produced with clays used by potters at Nakbe, about 35 km to the west (Hansen, 2000: 52).

SECTION

Materials and methods

PARAGRAPH

The 93 analysed Preclassic objects were chosen from a population of (at the time) 263 anthropomorphic figurines and 67 musical instruments (whistles, ocarinas) and zoomorphic figurines.

Unlike highland Mexico, where figurines were recovered in primary contexts, typically domestic, most of the artifacts discussed here came from secondary fills, with 36 (38.7%) of them from Early through Middle Preclassic contexts (the validity of secondary contexts is addressed elsewhere; Rice, 2019).

The majority was recovered at Nixtun-Ch'ich', which had substantial early occupation.

Recovery locations include the four grid blocks of the monumental core, plus 20 other sectors, especially the 2007 excavations in Mound ZZ1 on the tip of the Candelaria Peninsula (Rice, 2009).

Only 17 fragments were recovered in test pitting at Ixlú, 12 of which were analysed.

The figurines, analysed and unanalysed, are typically unslipped; a small percentage has red slips or pigments, and even fewer have cream or black slips.

PARAGRAPH

Figurine fragments for INAA were selected through a stratified but purposive strategy to represent both sites and, at Nixtun-Ch'ich', different areas of the site (Table 1); different pastes, distinguished largely by color; and different body parts (especially heads).

Half a dozen were selected for reasons outside this sampling frame.

PARAGRAPH

Rice sampled the 93 figurines in the project field laboratory in Flores, Petén, by drilling with a Dremel tool fitted with a silicon carbide drill bit to extract the paste as a fine powder.

This powder was transferred to glass vials, labeled, carried to the U.S. and mailed to the Missouri University Research Reactor (MURR).

Statistical analyses of the findings were carried out by Cecil (2017) according to standard MURR procedures.

Full descriptions of the protocols are available on the MURR website (see http://archaeometry.missouri.edu/naa_overview.html) and in reports (Cecil, 2017; Stoner and Glascock, 2013).

A brief summary is presented here.

PARAGRAPH

INAA at MURR involves two irradiations and analyses (counts) of three gamma spectra to measure concentrations of elements in parts per million.

The first short (5 s) irradiation is followed by a 12-minute gamma count of nine short-lived elements: aluminum (Al), barium (Ba), calcium (Ca), dysprosium (Dy), potassium (K), manganese (Mn), sodium (Na), titanium (Ti) and vanadium (V).

Subsequently, the samples are irradiated for 24 h, allowed to decay for seven days and then subjected to a longer count of seven elements: arsenic (As), lanthanum (La), lutecium (Lu), neodymium (Nd), samarium (Sm), uranium (U) and ytterbium (Yb).

After three to four weeks of additional decay, the samples are counted again for cerium (Ce), cobalt (Co), chromium (Cr), cesium (Cs), europium (Eu), iron (Fe), hafnium (Hf), rubidium (Rb), antimony (Sb), scandium (Sc), strontium (Sr), tantalum (Ta), terbium (Tb), thorium (Th), zinc (Zn) and zirconium (Zr).

Because New World pottery samples lack nickel, that element is omitted.

In total, 32 elements were analysed.

PARAGRAPH

The chemical data are analysed through a series of mathematical and statistical procedures.

Element counts are transposed to base-10 logarithm concentrations with the goal of identifying distinct and relatively homogeneous groups of the sampled pottery in ‘compositional hyperspace.’

That is, each sampled object is characterised by 32 variables (elements), meaning that each object exists at a different point or set of coordinates within an imaginary 32-dimensional (multivariate) space or ‘hyperspace.’

Compositional groups are formed from these element data through various multivariate statistical pattern-recognition techniques.

One is principal components analysis (PCA), which transforms the raw and often correlated element concentrations into new, uncorrelated variables.

Results are presented in two dimensions as equivalent clusters of objects in a scatterplot displaying both the elements and the individual samples (a biplot) with respect to the first two principal components as reference axes.

SECTION

Results

PARAGRAPH

PCA assigned the 93 fragments to five distinct groups with eight outliers (Fig. 2; Table 2; Cecil, 2017).

In general, these artifacts revealed fairly low chemical variability, which is a common finding with clays from interior drainage basins (Stoner and Glascock, 2013: 10) and especially with the clays used to manufacture most of the pottery in the Petén lakes region (Cecil, 2001, 2013).

PARAGRAPH

Group 1 (n = 24; Fig. 3a) comprised white/cream paste specimens with elevated quantities of K and Ca.

These objects—fragments of both anthropomorphic figurines and whistles/ocarinas, often zoomorphic—are thought to have been made at Nixtun-Ch'ich'.

Small lumps of this clay were encountered in excavations throughout Nixtun-Ch'ich' and it is proposed that this resource is located there or nearby (Rice, 2019).

Other chemical (and mineralogical) analyses of Preclassic and Postclassic pottery excavated from Nixtun-Ch'ich' establish that the compositions of clays and pottery associated with this site are statistically different from those of other sites in the Petén lakes region (Cecil, 2001, 2013, 2017).

Because of this variation, we are confident that Group 1 reflects local manufacture.

Additionally, a sample of the clay was chemically analysed and demonstrated some similarities to the figurines, but they were not statistically significant enough to indicate a ‘match.’

This is not unusual and the clay should not be discounted as a possible source because when making pottery or figurines, potters add inclusions to modify the clay’s properties and rarely is there a one-to-one match between clay and vessel/figurine.

Worldwide, white-firing clays, which attain that color only through an absence of discoloring impurities (e.g., iron), are highly valued by potters and it is significant that this clay was not used to make Middle Preclassic pottery vessels, even ritual forms.

Because of this, and because the heads of several figurines displayed similar facial characteristics, it is possible that production of objects of this clay was carried out by a limited group at the site, and these might have had special uses.

PARAGRAPH

Groups 2 through 5 evidenced no clear associations with paste or surface colors, each group including a combination of tan, gray, brown, red and ‘other’ colors resulting from constituents such as organic matter and iron.

This heterogeneity probably indicates multiple producers and/or highly variable firing conditions.

Figurines formed of organic clays were typically incompletely oxidised, with a thin tan to light orange or red oxidised surface over a thick gray to black core.

These characteristics, plus the fact that several heads appeared to be barely fired at all, suggest that some of these objects were made hastily.

PARAGRAPH

Figurine fragments in Group 2 (n = 15) had high levels of Ca and they may originate in or around Nixtun-Ch'ich'.

Other analyses by Cecil demonstrate that pottery from Nixtun-Ch'ich' is chemically and petrographically distinct because of its high quantities of calcium (weathered into the clay, not added as temper).

Group members include five probable females, a cream-slipped, hollow arm of a baby with unusually well-delineated fingernails, and a head displaying the Maya tied headband of leadership (Fig. 3b).

PARAGRAPH

Group 3 (n = 34; Fig. 3c) included 10 fragments from Ixlú and the group may be local to the eastern or east-central Lake Petén Itzá basin.

Geochemically, Group 3 resembles some Middle Preclassic pottery analysed in a separate study but not yet published (Cecil, 2017: 7; Stoner and Glascock, 2013).

This chemical group also has the highest counts of Fe, which is a trend seen in pottery at sites in the Lake Petén Itzá region and Belize.

In comparisons with other samples excavated from Nixtun-Ch'ich' in the MURR Mesoamerica database, similarities suggest that this group is made from Lake Petén Itzá clays.

PARAGRAPH

The pastes of figurine fragments in Groups 4 (n = 4) and 5 (n = 8) incorporated volcanic ash as temper.

Volcanic ash occurs with variable frequency as temper in pottery throughout the lowlands in nearly all periods.

It is particularly common during the Classic period, but is rare in the Postclassic.

Likewise, ash is present in Middle Preclassic and earlier pottery in the lakes region, but it is not the principal tempering agent.

Group 5 has higher levels of Na, Cs, Rb and K than Group 4.

One member of Group 5 is a “Fat God” whistle or ocarina.

These groups also suggest local manufacture as their compositions fall within the parameters of other MURR chemical groups local to the Lake Petén Itzá basin.

PARAGRAPH

The eight unassigned figurine fragments either do not fit within any of the five compositional groups or have an equal likelihood of belonging to more than one group based on Mahalanobis distance statistics.

Only one of the fragments seems to be definitely dissimilar, both stylistically and geochemically, to the central Petén lakes figurines and likely came from elsewhere.

SECTION

Discussion and conclusions

PARAGRAPH

INAA of 93 fragments of primarily Middle Preclassic fired-clay anthropomorphic and zoomorphic figurines and musical instruments from two sites in the west-central Petén lakes region indicated that they formed five compositional groups, plus eight unassigned samples.

Most of the objects are probably local to the Lake Petén Itzá basin, with Group 1, of distinctive white calcareous paste, thought to be local to the site of Nixtun-Ch'ich' in the west.

Twelve sherds formed two small groups distinguished by chemical compositions indicating volcanic ash temper.

Only one of the eight unassigned fragments appears to be a genuine outlier, and was probably made outside the lakes area.

PARAGRAPH

As for the possible circulation of these figurines and their fragments, and inferences of ‘enchainment,’ INAA directly informs only about geochemical similarities and differences within a set of artifacts.

It does not explain the human behaviour underlying the presence of chemically (or stylistically) similar objects at widely separated locations; such explanations are inferences.

One Group 1 sample was an anthropomorphic head recovered at Ixlú; it will be remembered that these white-paste objects were likely made at Nixtun-Ch'ich'.

Two fragments in chemical Group 3, thought to possibly represent a single figurine on the basis of visual paste and stylistic characteristics, were recovered at different places: an arm in the Nixtun-Ch'ich' site core and the leg at Ixlú.

Within Nixtun-Ch'ich', a stylistically matching hand and foot with carefully delineated nails, both in chemical Group 5, were recovered in different locations: the hand in Group ZZ1 and the foot in small Ballcourt DD.

Two hands with six fingers, of visually similar paste, were recovered from separate loci at Nixtun-Ch'ich', but only one was analysed by INAA and fell into Group 5.

In principle, it could be argued that these fragments merely represent accidents of refuse (re)deposition at the site, although the sharing between Nixtun-Ch'ich' and Ixlú provides a persuasive counterexample.

PARAGRAPH

These individually handmade Middle Preclassic figurines are considered to be ‘inalienable objects’ (Rice, 2019; see Weiner, 1985) circulating through limited networks, and not mass-produced commodities that moved through market exchange.

An INAA study of Late and Terminal Classic mould-made figurines from the site of Motul de San José, on the northwest shore of Lake Petén Itzá, revealed that ‘they were often exchanged across sites and regions’ (Halperin, 2009: 385).

Most of the 16% produced from non-local clays were thought to have been made with clays around Tikal, to which Motul de San José was politically subordinate.

These Classic figurines, unlike the Preclassic objects discussed herein, were ‘mechanically reproduced’ using moulds, resulting in standardised images and acting, in one view, as a leveling mechanism that dulls perception of individual difference (see Halperin, 2009: 379–381).

Their widespread distribution, especially images of rulers, ‘aided in the dissemination of state symbols and ideologies’ (Halperin, 2009: 396).

PARAGRAPH

Classic mould-made figurines were made for mass consumption and possibly market exchange, and cannot be considered inalienable and enchainable objects in the same way that the hand-modeled Preclassic figurines were.

Moreover, they minimise the role of Epistémé (knowledge) and Techné (skilled practice; ‘knowledge-in-action,’ as in the production of art or ‘craft’) in the creation of the Preclassic figurines (see Costin, 2016; SEP, 2014).

Whereas both categories of figurines conveyed visual information and ‘meanings,’ the Preclassic figurines, by virtue of the greater skill levels invested in their production, were inalienable ‘prestige goods’ or ‘social valuables.’

This accounts for their recovery in elite or civic-ceremonial contexts, including fills in these loci.

Techné is associated with creation of products that are ‘socially useful’ (Costin, 2016: 2, 3), which, in the case of the Preclassic modeled figurines, relates to greater understanding of the roles of ancestors and supernaturals in the cosmos and in the cycling of time (Rice, 2019).

The exchange of fragments of these objects would have contributed to the building of key relationships and the constitution of early social life.

PARAGRAPH

Chemical compositional analyses combined with stylistic study, however, revealed only five examples of possible circulation of figurine fragments, including three between Nixtun-Ch'ich' and Ixlú and two from different loci within the former site.

These five—possibly seven with the two hands—of 93 (5.4%, 7.5%) fragments provide little support for the proposition that early Maya figurines were intentionally broken and the fragments exchanged, whether to ‘enchain’ kin or non-kin relationships or for some other reason.

Nonetheless, the possibility remains intriguing and future studies of Middle Preclassic Maya figurines should pursue it further.