10.1016/j.jhep.2019.06.025

ABSTRACT

TITLE

Elimination of hepatitis C virus has limited impact on the functional and mitochondrial impairment of HCV-specific CD8+ T cell responses

PARAGRAPH

Hepatitis C virus (HCV)-specific CD8+ T cells are functionally impaired in chronic hepatitis C. Even though HCV can now be rapidly and sustainably cleared from chronically infected patients, the repercussions of HCV clearance on virus-specific CD8+ T cells remain elusive.

Here, we aimed to investigate if HCV clearance by direct-acting antivirals (DAAs) could restore the functionality of exhausted HCV-specific CD8+ T cell responses.

PARAGRAPH

HCV-specific CD8+ T cells in peripheral blood were obtained from 40 patients with chronic HCV infection, during and 6 months following IFN-free DAA therapy.

These cells were analyzed for comprehensive phenotypes, proliferation, cytokine production, mitochondrial fitness and response to immune-checkpoint blockade.

PARAGRAPH

We show that, unlike activation markers that decreased, surface expression of multiple co-regulatory receptors on exhausted HCV-specific CD8+ T cells remained unaltered after clearance of HCV.

Likewise, cytokine production by HCV-specific CD8+ T cells remained impaired following HCV clearance.

The proliferative capacity of HCV multimer-specific CD8+ T cells was not restored in the majority of patients.

Enhanced in vitro proliferative expansion of HCV-specific CD8+ T cells during HCV clearance was more likely in women, patients with low liver stiffness and low alanine aminotransferase levels in our cohort.

Interestingly, HCV-specific CD8+ T cells that did not proliferate following HCV clearance could preferentially re-invigorate their proliferative capacity upon in vitro immune-checkpoint inhibition.

Moreover, altered mitochondrial dysfunction exhibited by exhausted HCV-specific CD8+ T cells could not be normalized after HCV clearance.

PARAGRAPH

Taken together, our data implies that exhausted HCV-specific CD8+ T cells remain functionally and metabolically impaired at multiple levels following HCV clearance in most patients with chronic hepatitis C.

Our results might have implications in cases of re-infection with HCV and for HCV vaccine development.

