10.1016/j.jhep.2017.12.016

ABSTRACT

TITLE

Adult hepatocytes direct liver organogenesis through non-parenchymal cell recruitment in the kidney

PARAGRAPH

Since the first account of the myth of Prometheus, the amazing regenerative capacity of the liver has fascinated researchers because of its enormous medical potential.

Liver regeneration is promoted by multiple types of liver cells, including hepatocytes and liver non-parenchymal cells (NPCs), through complex intercellular signaling.

However, the mechanism of liver organogenesis, especially the role of adult hepatocytes at ectopic sites, remains unknown.

In this study, we demonstrate that hepatocytes alone spurred liver organogenesis to form an organ-sized complex 3D liver that exhibited native liver architecture and functions in the kidneys of mice.

PARAGRAPH

Isolated hepatocytes were transplanted under the kidney capsule of monocrotaline (MCT) and partial hepatectomy (PHx)-treated mice.

To determine the origin of NPCs in neo-livers, hepatocytes were transplanted into MCT/PHx-treated green fluorescent protein transgenic mice or wild-type mice transplanted with bone marrow cells isolated from green fluorescent protein-mice.

PARAGRAPH

Hepatocytes engrafted at the subrenal space of mice underwent continuous growth in response to a chronic hepatic injury in the native liver.

More than 1.5 years later, whole organ-sized liver tissues with greater mass than those of the injured native liver had formed.

Most remarkably, we revealed that at least three types of NPCs with similar phenotypic features to the liver NPCs were recruited from the host tissues including bone marrow.

The neo-livers in the kidney exhibited liver-specific functions and architectures, including sinusoidal vascular systems, zonal heterogeneity, and emergence of bile duct cells.

Furthermore, the neo-livers successfully rescued the mice with lethal liver injury.

PARAGRAPH

Our data clearly show that adult hepatocytes play a leading role as organizer cells in liver organogenesis at ectopic sites via NPC recruitment.



