10.1016/j.jasrep.2018.08.037

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Identification and examination of inconspicuous carnivore modifications

SECTION

Introduction

SECTION

Conspicuous and inconspicuous modifications

PARAGRAPH

One of the ways the science of taphonomy is used during the examination of vertebrate remains by forensic investigators, archaeologists and paleontologists is to identify agents of post mortem processes (Efremov, 1940; Lyman, 1994).

When bone is all that remains, taphonomic analysis of surface modifications can reveal evidence of direct interaction between agents of modification and carcasses that can assist in the reconstruction of peri-mortem events (Fisher, 1995; Lyman, 1994).

Modifications exist as one of two types: conspicuous or inconspicuous.

The difference between the two types is that because of their large size, key morphological features of conspicuous modifications, make them identifiable as tooth marks, cut marks, abrasion, etc., without magnification (Binford, 1981; Blumenschine et al., 1996; Capaldo, 1997; Dominguez-Rodrigo, 1999; Dominguez-Rodrigo et al., 2007; Fisher, 1995; Haynes, 1983; Lyman, 1994, Pobiner, 2007).

Conversely, inconspicuous marks refer to shallow, obscure modifications whose variable features are too small to be visible with the naked eye and are only detected by either a slight color change within the interior of the modification or the presence of polish (Amore and Blumenschine, 2016; Blumenschine et al., 1996; Blumenschine, 2007; Capaldo, 1997; Fisher, 1995).

Both conspicuous and inconspicuous carnivore tooth marks have been identified on bone assemblages at archaeologically significant sites, such as the FLK Zinjanthropus site in Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania (Blumenschine, 1986; Blumenschine, 2007; Blumenschine, 1995; Blumenschine et al., 1996; Bunn and Kroll, 1986; Capaldo, 1997; Dominguez-Rodrigo and Barba 2006, 2007; Dominguez-Rodrigo et al., 2007; Pante, 2013; Pante et al., 2012, 2015; Pobiner, 2007; Selvaggio, 1994).

While problems with collecting congruous bone surface modification data have revolved around both conspicuous and inconspicuous modifications, problems with the latter, such as requiring significantly more time to locate, quanify and identify to an agent, are inherently worse due to their small size and perceived ambiguous morphology (Blumenschine et al., 1996; Fisher, 1995; Lyman, 1994; Cruz-Uribe and Klein, 1994; Dominguez-Rodrigo and Barba, 2006).

It is because of these problems that arguments have been made for their exclusion from examinations of bone surfaces (Blumenschine, 1995; Blumenschine et al., 1996; Cruz-Uribe and Klein, 1994; Dominguez-Rodrigo, 1999; Oliver, 1994).

Regardless of these challenges, Blumenschine et al. (1996) encourage the inclusion of inconspicuous modifications, suggesting that their omission results in tooth mark counts that fail to accurately reflect the true scope of carnivore scavenging activity on an assemblage.

To facilitate the reduction of inter-analyst error and to improve reproducibility, researchers have advocated the consistent use of “a hand lens under strong light, systematically examining all parts of the surface at different angles with respect to the incoming light for conspicuous and inconspicuous marks” (Blumenschine et al., 1996; Pante et al., 2012).

PARAGRAPH

But researchers have recognized special circumstances that may require more intensive microscopic analyses, such as microstructural differences among bones of separate species, modification ambiguity or modification mimicry, and when identifying marks of unknown origin (Archer and Braun, 2013; Bell, 1990; Bello et al., 2009; Behrensmeyer et al., 1986; Bromage, 1984; Madgewick, 2014; Pante et al., 2017; Shipman and Rose, 1983).

For example, the microstructural differences among the bones of terrestrial and aquatic animals influence the morphology of modifications made by the same agents, making them smaller and more inconspicuous on the bones of aquatic species (Archer and Braun, 2013).

This alters how effectively seasoned researchers can identify the smaller, more inconspicuous modifications (Archer et al., 2014; Archer and Braun, 2013).

In these cases, the use of a hand lens to observe and identify smaller, inconspicuous modifications is considered insufficient to maintain accurate, reproducible results between observers, but microscopic analysis using visible light microscopy at 40× of the same modifications increased agreement between observers (Archer et al., 2014; Archer and Braun, 2013).

PARAGRAPH

Earlier work by Shipman and Rose (1983) compared various criteria for identifying unknown bone surface modifications, such as the width of the mark, cross sectional shape and microscopic criteria.

Their study illustrated that the magnification and resolving power of scanning electron microscopy for visualizing and documenting diagnostic features and normal variation within known surface marks, such as cut marks, trampling, tooth marks, and sedimentary abrasion, was superior to that of visible light microscopy.

Because this method provided a means to characterize the features of known modifications, it was also more reliable for identifying unknown surface marks.

SECTION

Tooth mark mimicry by microbial agents at FLK Zinjanthropus

PARAGRAPH

For as long as bone surface modifications have been studied at the FLK Zinjanthropus site in Olduvai Gorge considerable disagreement has existed among researchers regarding models of hominin carcass acquisition that are based on tool and tooth mark data (Bunn, 1986; Bunn and Kroll, 1986; Blumenschine, 1988, 1995, 2007; Pante et al., 2012, 2015; Capaldo, 1997; Dominguez-Rodrigo and Barba, 2006, 2007; Pante et al., 2017; Selvaggio and Wilder, 2001; Shipman, 1986).

In 2006, Dominguez-Rodrigo and Barba contended that Blumenschine's tooth mark counts at FLK Zinj, which include both conspicuous and inconspicuous tooth marks, were inflated due to the misidentification of inconspicuous modifications as tooth marks (Blumenschine, 1986, 1995, 2007; Dominguez-Rodrigo and Barba, 2006, 2007).

Their argument is based on the assertion that the morphology of the marks in question fail to follow all the criteria for tooth mark identification which has been widely accepted among researchers and defined by Blumenschine as having “U-shaped cross-sections that commonly show crushing that is conspicuous under the hand lens, and which, macroscopically, gives the mark a different patina than the adjacent bone surface” (Binford, 1981; Blumenschine, 1995: 29; Bunn, 1986; Dominguez-Rodrigo and Barba, 2006; Haynes, 1983; Lyman, 1994; Oliver, 1994; Pobiner, 2007; Pokines and Symes, 2013; Selvaggio, 1994; Selvaggio and Wilder, 2001; Shipman and Rose, 1983).

Instead, Dominguez-Rodrigo and Barba asserted that many of these modifications are the result of microbial activity which he observed as producing modifications that do not penetrate the cortical surface of bone and do not produce microfracturing.

SECTION

Purpose and research goals

PARAGRAPH

The purpose of this paper is to determine the interpretive potential of inconspicuous tooth marks by examining their microscopic morphology and etiology.

The goal of this study is to begin answering the following questions:

Are there unique microscopic identifiers that will unambiguously identify inconspicuous marks made by carnivorous actors?

Can the etiology of inconspicuous tooth marks be used to make stronger inferences regarding hominin carcass acquisition?

PARAGRAPH

This paper will show that using visible light microscopy at 25× reveals inconspicuous tooth marks exhibit characteristics consistent with that of abrasion, such as a compacted surface, polish, and a lack of visible penetration into the cortical surface.

But, when examining inconspicuous tooth/beak mark abrasion using high resolution scanning electron microscopy at 50× reveals the same features that universally characterize conspicuous tooth marks, such as a ‘u’ shaped cross section and microfracturing within the tooth mark.

Data collected here also support assertions that soft tissue adhering to bones may mask the damaging effect of a carnivore's teeth/beak by limiting penetration into the bone, hypothesizing that ratios of inconspicuous tooth mark abrasion to those of the conspicuous tooth marks may be an indicator of soft tissue presence.

SECTION

Materials and methods

SECTION

Background

PARAGRAPH

Data presented in this paper come from a larger study, which tested the null hypothesis that North American carnivore consumption sequences do not differ from those of African animals (Rowe, 2015).

To acquire data regarding consumption and disarticulation sequences, the study protocol involved placing legally acquired carcasses of road killed white tail deer (Odocoileus virginianus), that were no more than a few hours old in areas with known wild coyote (Canis latrans) populations.

Prior to placement carcasses were examined to record the ages of the deer and any perimortem injury sustained by the deer (Table 1).

No constraints were put in place to control for wild scavengers and the carcasses were not secured in any of the trials.

Other than coyotes, scavenger species that were observed feeding on carcasses include bald eagle (Haliaeetus leucocephalus), turkey vulture (Cathartes aura), raven (Corvus corvax), crow (Corvus brachyrynchos) and red fox (Vulpes vulpes).

Carcasses were also placed in enclosures of captive species, including coyote, wolf (Canis lupus) and mountain lion (Puma concolor).

SECTION

Study trials

PARAGRAPH

The inability to acquire multiple salvageable road kill at the same time disallowed synchronous placement of all trials.

The study took place from September 29, 2014–November 10th, 2014.

Table 1 shows the dates of placement and collection dates for all 5 trials.

Two different locations were used for trials involving wild coyotes based on evidence of established coyote populations in Elk River (ER) and Linwood (LW), Minnesota and were labeled as WC (wild coyote).

Location ER is on the private property of a quarry and gravel pit.

This location has equal amounts of dense tree cover and tall grass and abuts undeveloped forest to the north.

For trial 1ER-WC the deer was placed in an area of dense tree cover with open grass to the north and a water source 400 m to the south.

In trial 2ER-WC the deer was placed in an open area with only two small trees in the vicinity.

Open grass surrounded the site and a water source could be seen from the site about 200 m to the east.

Trial 4LW-WC used wild coyote and was on the property of the Wildlife Science Center (WSC).

The WSC is a wildlife research center supported by the state of Minnesota that houses carnivorous predators native to Minnesota, including red fox, black bear (Ursus americanus), wolf, coyote and mountain lion.

The LW location is closed to visitors and has 6 enclosures containing captive coyotes, wolves, black bears and mountain lions.

Trial 3, labeled 3WSC-CC, was located at the Wildlife Science Center's Ham Lake facility which is open to visitors and houses wolves, fox, mountain lion, coyote and coy dogs and was labeled CC (captive coyote).

The trial labeled 5WSC-CW was a deer placed in a WSC wolf enclosure approximately one day before the study commenced and labeled CW (captive wolf).

Although no data were recorded prior to placement or during consumption, the carcass was collected to compare wolf tooth mark placement and morphology to that of the coyotes.

SECTION

Data collection

PARAGRAPH

Two motion sensitive Cuddeback C Model cameras, equipped with infrared night vision and 8GB SD cards, were used for 24-hour surveillance (Fig. 1).

Two cameras were used for each carcass and were attached to trees approximately 3 m from each carcass or as the landscape allowed.

Natural landscape was used for mounting the cameras since it has been suggested, and was observed in this study, that coyotes may become wary of motion sensitive cameras if they are mounted in obvious locations (Larrucea et al., 2007; Foster and Harmsen, 2012).

This was confirmed during a trial at LW-MN where T-posts were used for camera mounting when trees weren't available.

Coyotes were seen on the camera suspiciously walking around the camera while showing no interest in the deer.

When the same carcass was moved 40 m south of the original location so cameras could be affixed to trees, coyotes immediately came in and began scavenging the carcass.

The remains from this carcass were not used in this study due to possible influence on the feeding behavior of the coyotes.

Cameras for the captive population were placed on the outside of the enclosure to limit damage to the camera and to capture the best angle of the carcass with a view of the entire enclosure.

PARAGRAPH

Data were recorded in two ways: motion sensitive cameras took pictures every minute and video every 30 s for 10–20-second intervals, depending on the setting.

Settings were based on the amount of scavenger activity.

The timer was set for 20 s of video every 30 s when visits were infrequent, which occurred during the first few days of carcass placement.

In each case, as visits to the carcass became more frequent, video time was shortened to 10 s of video every 30 s to save space on the SD card.

SD cards were changed daily in late afternoon when scavenging was at a minimum.

Video time for sample 3WSC-CC was set for 10 s every 30 s due to continuous movement around the enclosure of the coyotes that didn't involve consumption of the carcass.

When SD cards were changed physical observations on soft tissue consumption and disarticulation were recorded.

PARAGRAPH

Carcasses were removed from locations ER-MN and LW-MN once scavenger activity was reduced to fewer than 10 visits per day.

In the case of 3WSC-CC and 5WSC-CW, the carcasses were removed at the discretion of the animal management staff after coyotes became disinterested in the carcass or when carcasses failed to meet their standards for providing quality feed.

Trial 4LW-WC was placed two days before a snowstorm and was not recovered for two weeks due to inaccessibility of the roads leading to the site.

When the site was accessed only five disarticulated elements were recovered from the snow.

The site was checked after the snow melted and no additional elements were recovered.

Video surveillance showed intensive scavenging and disarticulation by no fewer than 6 wild coyotes ending in the carcass being dragged off-site after a three-hour period.

PARAGRAPH

As a comparison to fresh bone, 22 long bones which remained from carcasses fed to mountain lions, coyotes and wolves were collected and labeled 6WSC-MN.

These bones, found void of flesh scraps and in weathering stage 0 (Behrensmeyer, 1978), were unintentionally left in the open-air animal enclosures for no more than six months and no less than two months following consumption.

PARAGRAPH

After remains were collected they were observed for flesh availability.

Following Pobiner and Dominguez-Rodrigo's terminology, a ranking of soft tissue amount was given to skeletal elements according with Table 2 (Dominguez-Rodrigo, 1999; Pobiner, 2007, 2015).

The term flesh scrap describes a skeletal element “that has <10% of its original muscle mass remaining”, while bulk flesh, following Pobiner, refers to flesh that has the “majority of muscle mass still adhering to the bone” (Dominguez-Rodrigo, 1999; Pobiner, 2007, 2015).

Because single elements were being identified with one ranking, bulk flesh and flesh scraps were added together to come up with an estimated percentage of overall available flesh (Table 2).

For example, a bone retaining ‘bulk flesh’ could have been considered highly consumed if that bulk flesh made up <10% of the overall flesh originally available on that bone.

PARAGRAPH

After the amount of flesh was documented, all elements, except the 22 bones from 6WSC-MN, were completely submerged in water and processed in crock pots at 250 °F for no more than 8 h. Because many features that are visible on bone are on periosteum rather than the bone itself (Shipman and Rose, 1983), if periosteum was found still adhering to the bone, bones were boiled again for no more than 2 h at a time until all soft tissue and periosteum was removed.

After the bones were processed and air-dried they were examined using 4× and 10× magnification and bright light, which is considered sufficient when examining bones for modifications (Blumenschine et al., 1996; Bunn, 1986; Dominguez-Rodrigo et al., 2009; Fisher, 1995).

Using this technique, inconspicuous tooth marks on bone, collected from trials 1–5, were only visible because they were either slightly darker than the rest of the bone or were shiny due to polish.

Modifications recorded fit three main tooth mark categories: tooth scores/furrows, tooth pits/punctures, and inconspicuous marks (Table 3).

The modifications were then examined with a Leica MZ16A stereoscope and Nikon scanning electron microscope set in backscatter mode.

Modifications were examined using increasing magnification until features came into sight.

Results were documented using the least amount of magnification possible to identify the features associated with each modification.

Under the Leica MZ16A, abrasion morphology was visible at 25× and when using the Nikon scanning electron microscope, profile morphology was first clearly visible at 250×, although images were also analyzed at higher magnifications to view finer details of the modifications.

SECTION

Results

SECTION

Soft tissue availability

PARAGRAPH

After inconspicuous and conspicuous tooth/beak marks from all trials were identified on processed bones, the ratios of both types of marks were linked with the presence of soft tissue by looking at the consumption ranking (Table 2) of the element on which that mark appeared.

Table 4 displays cumulative data from all elements in all trials and shows that lightly consumed elements with >50% of the soft tissue available exhibit a greater ratio of inconspicuous to conspicuous tooth/beak marks.

But as consumption intensifies to ranking 2 and 1, more soft tissue is removed and there was an increase in the number of conspicuous pits, scores, furrows and punctures, bringing the ratio of marks closer to 1.

SECTION

Inconspicuous modifications

PARAGRAPH

Table 5 shows the scavengers present and the amount of time each scavenger spent consuming carcasses for the duration of each trial.

Bald eagles spent the majority of their time consuming flesh on the hindquarters, which relegated the vultures to the open wounds of the head and rib cage (Fig. 2).

The mammalian carnivores only gained access in the absence of the bald eagles and avoided elements that had been defleshed, instead feeding on areas that had greater amounts of soft tissue.

This is consistent with observations made on the feeding patterns of lions that show a loss of interest in bones void of flesh (Dominguez-Rodrigo, 1999).

PARAGRAPH

Of the 369 inconspicuous carnivore marks from all trials, only those marks that could be excised from the bone without damaging adjacent marks (n = 35) were considered for microscopic examination.

To differentiate the morphology of beak and tooth marks, inconspicuous marks were separated into two groups, those made by mammals and those made by Aves.

Mammalian marks were only taken from trials where mammals were the only carnivores present, while avian marks were identified using video surveillance that showed areas of bone that Aves were accessing exclusively.

Using this method, only five of the inconspicuous marks could be identified as avian in origin with 100% confidence.

PARAGRAPH

When examined using a 10× hand lens and bright light, inconspicuous tooth marks were similar in shape and orientation to that of conspicuous tooth mark modifications, but they did lack a visible ‘u’ shaped cross section.

Both avian and mammalian inconspicuous modifications were only visible as a slight change in color or as a polished surface (Fig. 3).

Macroscopic differences between avian and mammalian marks were also noted (Table 6).

While mammalian tooth marks were not always straight, they were more uniform than the avian modifications, which consistently show tapered edges with a curvilinear body that is thicker in the center (Fig. 4).

These findings were enough to warrant microscopic examination of identified inconspicuous tooth marks and beak marks using Leica MZ16A stereoscope and Nikon environmental scanning electron microscopes.

Microscopic examination at 25× using the Leica stereoscope (Fig. 5) showed obvious morphology in both mammalian and avian samples that is consistent with that defining abrasion, including surface erosion that results in the loss of cortical surface detail (Fisher, 1995).

PARAGRAPH

Because diagnostic features using visible light microscopy were obscure or possibly invisible (Shipman and Rose, 1983), subsequent examination of both carnivore tooth and beak marks using high resolution, scanning electron microscopy was deemed necessary on all 40 samples.

Images of the mammalian tooth mark abrasion showed microscopic microfracturing within a U shaped cross section at 50× and 250× (Fig. 6).

This morphology contrasted with that of the avian created abrasion that failed to show the typical ‘u’ shaped cross section or the microfracturing associated with mammalian tooth marks (Fig. 7).

At higher magnification, the width of abrasions created by both avian and mammalian agents were irregular and contrasted the more consistent width of conspicuous modifications (Fig. 8).

SECTION

Discussion

SECTION

Inconspicuous modifications

PARAGRAPH

In 2009, during a study of turkey vulture scavenging, microscopic analysis was used to indirectly identify inconspicuous modifications made by avian carnivore beaks as abrasion (Reeves, 2009).

Reeves (2009: 4) describes modifications which were more likely made by turkey vulture beaks rather than the weaker talons, as “linear surface scratches” that present as “a change in color on the surface of the bone, with very little to no surface depth”, which clearly fits with the accepted morphology of abrasion.

Reeves' observations were corroborated by Dominguez-Solera and Dominguez-Rodrigo (2011) in their study on griffon vulture (Gypes fulvus) scavenging.

They concluded that griffon vultures make marks which are morphologically consistent with that of trampling marks, that are created by contact of bone with sediment.

They also concluded that these modifications, using visible light microscopy at 20×, show evidence of microabrasion, which they define as fine, shallow striae that has also been identified on bones that have been subject to trampling (Dominguez-Rodrigo et al., 2009; Madgewick, 2014; Thompson et al., 2015).

This is the first possible example we have of inconspicuous abrasion created by carnivores that displays modification mimicry.

The use of 24 h video and photographic surveillance in the present study eliminated the possibility that inconspicuous modifications came from a source other than mammalian and avian scavengers capable of producing or mimicking abrasion (such as microbes, sediment).

SECTION

Inconspicuous tooth/beak mark morphology

PARAGRAPH

The use of visible light microscopy at 25× showed inconspicuous tooth/beak mark features, including evidence of polish and alterations within the mark due to the loss of cortical surface detail, are consistent with that of abrasion.

Abrasion is defined as surface erosion through the force of physical contact with agents such as sediment, water, and other bone, that leads to the loss of surface detail, which occurs without visibly penetrating the bone's surface (Bromage, 1984; Fisher, 1995; Lyman, 1994; Madgewick, 2014; Olsen and Shipman, 1988).

Polish can also be a visible consequence of abrasive forces that compact the surface of the bone, resulting in a shine due to reflectance off the increased surface area (Bromage, 1984).

It has also been shown that microbes can mimic the effects of abrasion (Davis, 1997).

Therefore, we use the term ‘inconspicuous carnivore abrasion’ (ICA) to distinguish abrasion originating from carnivore teeth from abrasion created by other sources.

SECTION

Etiology of ICA

PARAGRAPH

The use of scanning electron microscopy made visible the differences between inconspicuous marks made by mammals and aves, such as the width of the mark and cross sectional shape which were variable and overlapping between both carnivores.

These data follow Shipman and Rose (1983), who state that criteria based on width and cross section are not reliable and should not be used as the sole basis for identifying bone surface modifications.

At least three reasons are hypothesized as contributing to the variability of these marks between classes of animals: feeding mechanisms, tool (beak or tooth) type and the presence of soft tissue.

It has been accepted among researchers that microfracturing within a U shaped cross section is diagnostic of conspicuous carnivore tooth marks, and this may be due to the bidirectional force of the maxillary and mandibular dentition, which results in crushing when a carnivore closes its jaws (Andrews, 1990; Haglund et al., 1988; Pokines and Symes, 2013; Shipman, 1981).

Conversely, most avian carnivores including bald eagles, use their beaks to tear meat into bite sized pieces, resulting in a unidirectional force that grazes across, rather than compresses the surface of the bone (Bildstein, 2006).

This application of force results in a lack of both microfracturing and a U shaped cross section.

PARAGRAPH

Another explanation for the variability seen between the width and shape of marks produced among mammals, as well as among mammals and aves, is the use of multiple tooth types versus the use of a beak for soft tissue extraction.

Video surveillance showed coyotes performing two very distinctive behaviors, that use different types of teeth, when scavenging deer carcasses.

The first behavior was the actual removal of meat, where coyotes were seen biting down and pulling meat off with their incisors and canine teeth in a direction perpendicular to the bone (Shipman, 1981).

The second most common behavior was grabbing limbs and pulling on them, presumably to disarticulate or for removal of the carcass from the site.

As the coyote pulled on the bone it would slide through the coyote's mouth resulting in marks that were more variable in size and direction.

Avian carnivores showed one typical behavior, which was that of the birds picking at the carcass to remove meat with their beaks.

This action resulted in short, curved marks that presumably reflect the action and shape of the beak.

Variability among marks of both animal classes is also due to the presence of soft tissue on the limb being consumed.

Earlier studies have shown that variability in stone tool mark width and cross section depth was the result of soft tissue coming between the bone and the tool being used (Shipman and Rose, 1983).

Since the action of drawing a tooth across a bone is similar to that of the slicing motion of a stone tool, the presence of soft tissue between an animal’s tooth/beak and the bone they are accessing will result in modifications of varying size and shape (Shipman, 1981).

SECTION

Soft tissue consumption

PARAGRAPH

Since this study uses only qualitative descriptions of soft tissue availability that may not be precisely reproducible, the results only show a trend in the relationship between the presence of soft tissue and ICA.

However, this trend is consistent with observations made by other researchers: soft tissue will protect the bone's cortical surface from cut mark damage, and by extension from tooth and beak mark damage (Fisher, 1995; Gifford-Gonzalez, 1989; Shipman, 1981; Shipman and Rose, 1983).

As animals begin consuming a fully fleshed carcass, the flesh will limit the penetrative ability of the animal's teeth or beak, which results in higher proportions of ICA relative to conspicuous marks as the teeth or beaks graze the surface of the bone.

As consumption progresses and intensifies, more soft tissue is removed which exposes the underlying bone and results in greater damage to the bone.

The results produced in this study are consistent with these expectations.

Dominguez-Rodrigo's (1999) study on flesh availability and bone modifications in carcasses consumed by lions showed that lions are more apt to make inconspicuous tooth mark modifications when “consuming on the spot”, rather than when the units of bone are removed for more intensive consumption, which then results in more conspicuous modifications (Dominguez-Rodrigo, 1999).

This may indicate a connection between power scavenging and a higher ratio of inconspicuous to conspicuous tooth mark abrasion if carcasses are acquired by a secondary scavenger soon after primary acquisition.

PARAGRAPH

Despite the problems that can arise with determining amounts of soft tissue and correlating these areas to places where there are conspicuous and inconspicuous tooth/beak marks, the results corroborate assertions made in previous studies that the presence of soft tissue does protect bone from external damage (Shipman, 1981; Shipman and Rose, 1983).

These data could then support a hypothesis that states: Areas on bone where ICA are present indicate that at the time consumption began there was soft tissue on the bone which limited the ability of the animal's teeth/beak to produce marks that penetrated the cortical surface, resulting in inconspicuous marks.

The ability to hypothesize the predicted presence of soft tissue may also provide inferences regarding the attractiveness of the carcass to secondary scavengers and thus lead to models regarding passive/power scavenging by hominins.

Because tooth marks are incidental, the absence of tooth marks does not necessarily mean that carnivores were not involved in carcass consumption and extreme caution should be used when making these assumptions.

A realistic illustration of this scenario could occur when a primary accessor makes initial contact with a fully fleshed carcass, which is then scavenged by a secondary accessor.

If the carcass is scavenged by the secondary before the primary has a chance to leave evidence of their initial activity, the only evidence that would be seen on the skeletal remains is that of the secondary accessor.

SECTION

Application of tooth mark abrasion to the FLK-Zinj scavenging debate

PARAGRAPH

The FLK Zinj site provides an example for applying these data to an archaeological case where the ambiguity of inconspicuous modifications has perpetuated a debate regarding the accurate number of tooth marks on the bone assemblage (Blumenschine, 1995, 2007; Dominguez-Rodrigo, 2015; Dominguez-Rodrigo and Barba, 2006, 2007; Dominguez-Rodrigo et al., 2007; Pante et al., 2012, 2015, 2017).

The current research provides overwhelming evidence to support that it can no longer be stated with confidence that a lack of both visible penetration with evidence of crushing and a U-shaped cross-section, as well as irregular modification width, eliminates carnivores as modifying agents of inconspicuous marks on bones.

SECTION

Future research

PARAGRAPH

Future research should control for avian and mammalian species, by either using captive animals or removing elements immediately following consumption by individual species.

Controlling for species would allow analyses of the production and persistence of inconspicuous abrasion by each group of scavengers.

Following this new protocol, an exhaustive study of inconspicuous tooth mark morphology on both compact bone and cancellous bone by avian and mammalian carnivores would then be possible.

Cancellous bone, because of its decreased bone density and increased porosity, may be more vulnerable to tooth mark damage regardless of the presence of soft tissue.

Future studies should also consider whether the talons of birds, which use a bidirectional force for gripping, can create a crushing abrasion in the same way as the coyote's jaw.

Parsing out talon modifications from beak modifications would help reduce this potential confounding factor.

SECTION

Conclusion

PARAGRAPH

Despite the challenges of identifying inconspicuous tooth marks, the current study proposes conscientiously following Blumenschine et al.'s (1996) protocol for identifying bone modifications.

But because there are agents which may mimic tooth marks such as biochemical processes, conscientious examination of ambiguous inconspicuous marks should be done using higher magnification and resolution to make positive identifications.

This study shows that carnivore teeth and avian beaks can produce abrasion, which alone is not identifying but when carnivore tooth abrasion is examined using high resolution microscopy, a ‘u’ shaped cross section and microfracturing are visible.

These features can be used to differentiate between mammalian and avian carnivore scavengers, since avian scavengers only produce typical features associated with abrasion, such as a smeared cortical surface, loss of vasculature and polishing.

Although the possibility of biochemical processes mimicking carnivore tooth mark modifications may exist, examining the contextual evidence, such as the assemblages' state of preservation, in addition to microscopic examination, may help reduce questions regarding modifying agents.

PARAGRAPH

The ratios with which ICA occur on the long bones of faunal assemblages may be used to determine primary access by carnivores.

Because soft tissue protects the cortical surface of bone, the identification of inconspicuous tooth mark abrasions on the long bones of faunal assemblages indicate that soft tissue must have been present at the time of access by carnivores.

As the soft tissue is consumed the bone becomes more vulnerable to damage from teeth, thus an increase in conspicuous tooth marks is then observed.

As ratios of inconspicuous to conspicuous modifications near 1:1, inferences can be made regarding the amount of soft tissue present at the time of carnivore access.

These inferences can be used when making reflections on hominin activities and behavior, thus providing stronger evidence for models of carcass acquisition by hominins.