10.1016/j.jhep.2019.02.003

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Reactive cholangiocytes differentiate into proliferative hepatocytes with efficient DNA repair in mice with chronic liver injury

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Persistent injury of the hepatic tissue leads to fibrosis, which eventually evolves to cirrhosis, the end-stage of any chronic liver diseases.

Cirrhosis is characterized by distortion of hepatic architecture, regenerative nodules and hepatocyte dysfunction and is associated with life-threatening complications such as hepatocellular insufficiency and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).1

Liver cirrhosis is estimated to cause around 170,000 deaths annually.2

So far, liver transplantation represents the only curative therapeutic solution for many chronic liver diseases.

PARAGRAPH

In chronic liver diseases, extension of the fibrotic scars correlates with the presence of “ductular reaction” (DR).3,4

This term refers to proliferation of small immature cholangiocytes, located at the most proximal branches of the biliary tree.5,6

DR cells (also referred to as oval cells or liver progenitor cells) express hepatocyte (CK8, CK18) and cholangiocyte (OV-6, CK7, CK19)7–9 markers and have the potential to differentiate into either of these 2 liver epithelial lineages.10

Studies on human chronic liver diseases, including chronic viral hepatitis, auto-immune hepatitis and cirrhotic alcoholic or non-alcoholic fatty liver diseases, have highlighted substantial DR and the emergence of cells intermediate in size and immunophenotype between DR cells and hepatocytes.3,11

Several studies report that such intermediate cells represent more than half of the hepatocyte pool in the cirrhotic liver.8,9,12

A morphological continuum between DR, intermediate cells and hepatocytes may be interpreted as a gradual differentiation of DR in hepatocytes or as a de-differentiation of hepatocytes with acquisition of biliary traits (metaplasia).

This conundrum is hard to resolve by the observation of human material.

For this reason, several (inducible) lineage tracing mouse strains tagging either cholangiocytes/DR cells or hepatocytes have been used in the last decade in attempt to unravel the origin, the dynamics and the fate of DR cells in various dietary, chemical or genetic rodent models of liver injury.

The results of these studies remain conflicting.

Studies by us and other authors, in which the fate of DR cells or hepatocytes was followed after hepatocellular injury caused by a choline-deficient and ethionine-supplemented (CDE) diet, support the in vivo capability of DR to differentiate into hepatocytes, although in discrete proportions (<2.5%).13–15

Furthermore, DR cells isolated from CDE livers largely underwent hepatocyte differentiation when transplanted in vivo into a compromised liver, with an improvement of both liver architecture and function.16

In zebrafish the biliary compartment is also capable of generating functional hepatocytes.17

On the other hand, studies using the 3,5-diethoxycarbonyl-1,4-dihydrocollidine (DDC) diet as model of cholangiocytic injury failed to demonstrate a contribution of DR to the hepatocyte pool18,19 and other works even support a de-differentiation of traced hepatocytes into biliary-like cells.20–22

Taken together such inconsistent data indicate that the involvement of DR cells in regeneration is conditioned by the epithelial compartment undergoing damage and is thus disease-specific; while considerable discrepancies between models and observations in human material may stem from fundamental differences in severity and chronicity of injury.

Here, we aimed to analyze DR and its contribution to regeneration in a model replicating chronicity, severity and fibrotic progression seen in chronic hepatitis in humans.

PARAGRAPH

Impaired hepatocyte proliferative capacity is the essential requirement for DR.23 Recently, the capacity of the DR cells to maintain the liver parenchyma was demonstrated using genetic approaches to induce hepatocyte replicative senescence or growth arrest: i) deletion of Mdm216 to provoke p53-mediated senescence in all the hepatocytes; ii) deletion of β1-integrin24 to inhibit hepatic growth factor signaling thereby precluding hepatocyte replication, or of β-catenin directly in the hepatocytes to impair their proliferation;25 iii) the overexpression of p21 in conjunction with induction of injury using a DDC diet, a methionine-choline deficient diet and thioacetamide (TAA).24

Such genetic models artificially cause subacute hepatocyte failure, as opposed to progressive lesions occurring during chronic liver injury.

Thus, Deng et al. demonstrated the capability of DR cells to differentiate into hepatocytes in a long-term injury model (up to 52 weeks) using the toxic agent TAA.26

However, the kinetics of the response to the injury, as well as several features of the DR-derived hepatocytes, such as level of maturation, clonal expansion and resistance to stress remain unanswered.

PARAGRAPH

Here, we used a model of chronic liver injury mimicking the evolution and severity of chronic human diseases to follow the fate of DR cells, evaluating their contribution to the pool of hepatocytes and characterizing the newly formed hepatocytes.

We show that DR emerges from clonal expansion of cholangiocytes; DR cells then undergo hepatocyte differentiation and clonal proliferation.

Hepatocyte lineage tracing studies confirmed that these emerging cells are not of hepatocyte origin.

PARAGRAPH

The mature and newly formed functional hepatocytes have a survival, proliferative and DNA repair advantage that favors their amplification over native hepatocytes (i.e. those arising from division of pre-existent hepatocytes).

SECTION

Materials and methods

SECTION

Animal models

PARAGRAPH

To follow the fate of biliary/DR cells we used Osteopontin-iCreERT2 (OPN-Cre) mice crossed with Rosa26RYFP, Rosa26RmT/mG or Rosa26RConfetti.27–29

To achieve Cre-LoxP recombination, tamoxifen (T5648; Sigma) at a concentration of 30 mg/ml corn oil was injected intraperitoneally at 100 mg/kg of bodyweight for 2 consecutive days on 21 and 23 days old OPN-Cre;Rosa26RYFP and OPN-Cre;Rosa26RmT/mG mice or at 175 mg/kg of bodyweight for 5 days to ≥ 40 g OPN-Cre; Rosa26RConfetti mice.30

To genetically label the hepatocytes, AAV8-TBG-Cre adenovirus was injected intravenously at a concentration of 7, 5x1011 gc/mouse in Rosa26RYFP or Rosa26RmT/mG reporter mice.31

We used yellow fluorescent protein (YFP) immunohistochemistry (IHC) or direct observation under the fluorescence microscope to analyze tagged cells, respectively (see Supplementary Information).

One month after tamoxifen treatment (to ensure complete tamoxifen wash-out) chronic liver injury was induced by repeated intraperitoneal injection of carbon tetrachloride (CCl4) 3 times per week for 4, 6, 8, 16 and 24 weeks.

The starting dose of CCl4 was 500 µl/kg, with dose increase up to 800 µl/kg when animals gained weight.

Livers were analyzed 72 h after the last CCl4 injections or after a 2- or 4-week CCl4-free recovery period.

Transgenic mice that did not receive tamoxifen were used as controls.

The size of the groups is specified in the figure legends.

PARAGRAPH

Mice were housed at 4–5/cage, maintained at a constant temperature of 22 °C, exposed at all times to a 12 h light/12 h dark cycle and had access to food and water ad libitum.

Animal care was provided in accordance with the guidelines for humane care for laboratory animals in accordance with European regulations and in conformity with ARRIVE guidelines.

The study protocol was approved by the university ethics committee for the use of experimental animals (2012/MD/UCL/026 and 2016/UCL/MD/003).

SECTION

FACS sorting analysis

PARAGRAPH

Livers from control OPN-Cre;Rosa26RmT/mG mice were dissociated using pronase and collagenase to obtain a single cell suspension.32

Two centrifugations of 50 g were performed to separate the non-parenchymal fraction from the hepatocytes.

We blocked the non-parenchymal fraction using bovine serum albumin for 10 min and incubated cells with the indicated antibodies for 15 min.

After adding propidium iodide we used a FACSAriaII (BD) to isolate liver sinusoidal endothelial cells (CD32+F4/80− UV−PI−), macrophages (F4/80+CD32−UV−PI−), hepatic stellate cells (UV+F4/80−CD32−PI−) and biliary epithelial cells (EpCAM+UV−CD45−PI−).

Hepatocytes were resuspended in PBS and immediately sorted.

In each population cells were analysed for tdTomato (red) and mGFP (green) fluorescence.

PARAGRAPH

For the isolation of hepatocytes and RNA sequencing (RNAseq), livers from tamoxifen-injected untreated and CCl4 treated OPN-Cre;Rosa26RmT/mG mice were digested using a 2-step collagenase method.

Solutions were perfused through the portal vein.

Two centrifugations of 50 g were performed to separate the non-parenchymal cells from the hepatocytes.

The resulting hepatocyte populations were filtered through a 100 µm filter and resuspended in 2 mM EDTA + 1% FBS solution and sorted by a FACSAriaIII (BD) according to the presence of mTomato and mGFP fluorescence.

Dead cells were excluded by ToPro3 staining.

Sorted cells where lysed and the RNA was extracted using Qiagen RNeasy Mini kit (Promega) and processed for RNAseq.

Hepatocytes were also isolated from control mice, 4 weeks and 6 weeks CCl4-treated wild-type mice using the 2-step collagenase method.

The resulting hepatocytes were cultured on 6-well collagen-coated dishes for 24 h in DMEM/F12 + 10% FBS and used for immunofluorescence detection.

SECTION

Polyploidy analysis

PARAGRAPH

Immunostained liver sections (β-catenin/YFP/Hoechst) were imaged with a nanozoomer 2.0, Hamamatsu fluorescent microscope associated with image management software NDP view.

For ploidy analysis, Hoechst labelling was used to recognize hepatocytes nuclei with a roundness >0.8.

Nuclear area was detected automatically by a specific macro developed with ImageJ software (pixels ranging from 200 to 2,500 px2).

For each animal analyzed, more than 10,000 nuclei were counted.

SECTION

IHC score of liver tumors

PARAGRAPH

Consecutive liver sections stained for CK19, glutamine synthetase (GS encoded by Glul), β-catenin and Ki67 were scored by the expert pathologist Dr. Christine Sempoux.

Nodules with a diameter >1.5 mm were selected and evaluated as follow: GS was classified as normal (0) when expressed around the central vein or aberrant (1) if the expression was diffuse in the nodule or completely lost; β-catenin was evaluated as normal (1), cytoplasmatic (2) or cytoplasmatic/nuclear (3); Ki67 was classified as less than 10% (1), 10–25% (2) or more than 25% (3) level.

None of the nodules expressed CK19.

SECTION

Statistical analysis

PARAGRAPH

Data are presented as mean value ± SEM.

Statistical analyses were performed using a paired 2-tailed Student t test, a 1-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni’s post hoc, a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test for rank as appropriate using Graph Pad Prism 5 software.

Differences were considered significant at values of p <0.05.

PARAGRAPH

Additional information on methods (carcinogenetic animal model, qPCR analysis, immunohistochemistry, RNAseq) is provided in the supplementary information.

SECTION

Results

SECTION

DR cells differentiate into hepatocytes, contributing significantly to the liver parenchyma

PARAGRAPH

Mice were repeatedly injected with CCl4 for up to 16 weeks (Fig. 1A) to induce repeated cycles of central necrosis and wound healing, leading to progressive fibrosis.

Sirius red staining revealed central bridging fibrosis after 4 weeks, extension and thickening of fibrotic bundles progressively increased with time (Fig. 1B).

PARAGRAPH

During the injury, we followed the fate of biliary/DR cells using tamoxifen-inducible osteopontin-iCreERT2 (OPN-Cre) mice crossed with Rosa26RYFP or with Rosa26RmT/mG reporter mice to label biliary cells.

Activation of the OPN promoter in cholangiocytes drives the expression of the inducible Cre recombinase.

Tamoxifen binds the mutated estrogen receptor ERT2 and allows the activation and the translocation of the Cre recombinase into the nucleus.

Nuclear Cre recombinase was only found in biliary OPN+ cells in tamoxifen-injected OPN-Cre;Rosa26RYFP mice but not in mice that did not receive tamoxifen (Fig. S1A).

Recombination of the Rosa26R locus ensued and, according to the reporter strain, caused permanent expression of YFP in >85% of the cells of the biliary compartment or switched the expression of mTomato to that of mGFP in OPN-expressing cells with a 60% efficiency (Fig. S1B-D).

No YFP+ or mGFP+ cells have been observed in livers harvested from tamoxifen-free OPN-Cre;Rosa26RYFP or OPN-Cre;Rosa26RmT/mG mice, respectively (Fig. S1B; not shown).

As reported by us13,31 and others33 and verified here again by cell sorting in tamoxifen-treated OPN-Cre;Rosa26RmT/mG mice (Fig. S1C and Fig. S2), upon tamoxifen injection, reporter gene expression is restricted to the biliary compartment and does not occur in hepatocytes, stellate cells, liver sinusoidal endothelial cells or Kupffer cells.

PARAGRAPH

With this system, in the course of CCl4 treatment, any YFP+ hepatocyte would be of biliary origin.

After 4 weeks of tamoxifen wash-out, mice were treated with CCl4.

After 4 weeks of CCl4, rare YFP+ hepatocyte-like cells were observed in the vicinity of DR (Fig. 1C).

As the duration of liver insult increased, the number of YFP+ hepatocytes increased to reach a maximum at the 8-week time-point, such that 12% of the liver parenchyma was occupied by DR-derived hepatocytes (Fig. 1C-D).

By contrast, in tamoxifen-free OPN-Cre;Rosa26RYFP mice, no YFP+ cells and in particular no YFP+ hepatocytes where found in the course of CCl4 treatment (Fig. S3).

Thus, DR cells give rise to hepatocyte-like cells during chronic wound healing, supporting results shown in previous study.26

PARAGRAPH

The emergence of YFP+ hepatocytes-like cells after 6 weeks of CCl4 coincided with a marked drop in proliferative activity of native hepatocytes as assessed by Ki67 index (Fig. 1E and Fig. S4), as well as with an increased expression of p16 and p21 senescence markers (Fig. 1G).

To confirm senescence in hepatocytes, we isolated and cultured fresh hepatocytes from controls and from mice treated with CCl4 for 4 weeks and 6 weeks.

Senescence-associated β-galactosidase activity (not shown) and P21 expression (Fig. 1H-I) were readily seen in isolated hepatocytes from 6-week CCl4 samples but not from controls or 4-week CCl4 livers.

Senescence persists in the liver for the duration of the CCl4 insult, as demonstrated by progressive increase in p21 protein in whole liver extracts (Fig. S5).

The YFP+ hepatocytes formed patches, whose size increased with disease progression (Fig. 1C-F).

After 6 weeks of CCl4, a majority (>70%) of clusters were composed of 2–3 YFP+ hepatocyte-like cells.

Over time, the proportion of small clusters declined while the proportion of larger ones increased (Fig. 1F).

The YFP+ hepatocytes were HNF4α positive (Fig. 2A) and expressed hepato-specific liver enzymes according to their lobular location, such as expression of GS and CYP2E1 when pericentral or of CPS1 when periportal (Fig. 2B-C).

Ceacam1 staining confirmed that YFP+ hepatocytes were polarized and formed bile canaliculi with adjacent hepatocytes whether YFP+ or YFP− (Fig. 2D).

Also, YFP+ cells stored glycogen similarly to native YFP− hepatocytes (Fig. 2E).

However, they did not express biliary markers, such as CK19, the antigen EpCAM or the cholangiocyte factor HNF1β (Fig. S6).

We isolated native (mTomato+) and DR-derived (mGFP+) hepatocytes from OPN-Cre;Rosa26RmT/mG after 16 weeks of CCl4 (Fig. 2F; Fig. S7) and compared their transcriptome by RNAseq analysis.

Healthy mTomato+ hepatocytes from untreated OPN-Cre;Rosa26RmT/mG served as controls (Fig. 2F).

In the 3 populations, there was a similarly high count of hepatospecific genes such as albumin (Alb), Transthyretin (Ttr) and Cyp7a1 (Fig. 2G).

They also had similar expression of Cyp2E1 and GS (Fig. S8).

PARAGRAPH

To confirm that the new hepatocytes do not come from the division of pre-existing hepatocytes in the CCl4 injury model,34 we performed an independent mirror experiment in which hepatocyte fate was analysed.

Injection of AAV8-TBG-Cre adeno-associated virus to Rosa26RYFP mice induced YFP expression in nearly 100% of hepatocytes and zero cholangiocytes or non-parenchymal cells (Fig. S9).

Following chronic CCl4 injections (Fig. S10A), patches of unlabelled HNF4α+ and CK19− hepatocytes emerged in the liver (Fig. 3A-B).

Their size grew with duration of injury comparably to the patches of DR-derived hepatocyte traces using the OPN-CreERT2;Rosa26YFP system (Fig. 3C).

This confirms the emergence of clusters of hepatocytes not derived from division of pre-existing labelled hepatocytes.

SECTION

Long-term CCl4 induces a discrete and transient DR

PARAGRAPH

We then evaluated the kinetics of the DR response.

CK19+ bile ducts, normal in number and in morphology, were present in controls as well as diseased livers.

After 4 and 6 weeks of CCl4, in addition to normal bile ducts, discrete DR appeared as strings of CK19+ small cells irradiating into the parenchymal lobule from the portal tract (Fig. 4A,B).

Interestingly, in livers treated for longer duration (8–16 weeks), although the DR-derived hepatocytes increased in number (Fig. 1C,D), CK19+ cells were limited to bile ducts and no DR was observed (Fig. 4A,B).

The expression of Sox9 (a biliary transcription factor),35 Fn14 (a cell membrane receptor that transduces mitogenic signals to DR cells),36 Epcam and NCAM (cell adhesion molecules highly expressed in DR),37 all genes expressed explicitly in cholangiocytes but not in hepatocytes (Fig. S11), confirmed the transient activation of a DR during the course of CCl4 treatment (Fig. 4C).

In keeping, expression of genes related to the Notch pathway (Notch1, Notch2, Jagged1, Hey-1), whose activation is required for biliary specification,10 were concordantly expressed at higher levels after 6 weeks of CCl4, but not at later time-points (Fig. 4D).

SECTION

DR cells clonally expand and differentiate into hepatocytes with a proliferative advantage

PARAGRAPH

Our observations of transient DR and of the progressive rise in the size of DR-derived hepatocyte clusters suggest that few or single biliary cells expand as DR and undergo hepatocyte differentiation followed by several rounds of cell division.

To test this hypothesis, we used the OPN-Cre;Rosa26RConfetti mice29 in which tamoxifen injections result in stochastic expression of 1 of the 4 fluorescent proteins (nGFP, mCFP, RFP and YFP) encoded in the confetti allele in the OPN+ biliary cells.

In control uninjured livers, 15–20% of cholangiocytes of the bile ducts were labelled with 1 of the 4 fluorescent proteins (Fig. S12).

After CCl4, all cells in a given DR expressed the same fluorescent protein (Fig. 5A), and not a mosaicism of different fluorescent proteins or of tagged/untagged cells.

This observation supports that DR emerges from clonal expansion of a single biliary cell.

PARAGRAPH

Also, all DR-derived hepatocytes within a patch were found to express the same single fluorescent protein (Fig. 5B).

No mosaicism with a different fluorescent protein or with unlabelled hepatocytes was found in these patches.

The dimension of the patches was similar to the dimension of those observed when using the Rosa26RYFP reporter mice (Fig. S12b).

PARAGRAPH

As also shown earlier in the OPN-Cre;Rosa26RYFP livers (Figs. 1–3), the number of tagged hepatocytes in patches is larger than the number of cells in the original DR, suggesting that during chronic liver injury biliary cells undergo clonal proliferation before transforming into hepatocytes; the number of which subsequently increases due to several rounds of cell division.

PARAGRAPH

If clonal expansion of differentiated hepatocytes support patch growth, we should observe transition features between DR cells and hepatocytes in nascent patches, but not at later stages.

Thus, we measured the size of hepatocytes.

Coherently, we found that DR-derived cells were significantly smaller than adjacent native hepatocytes at the early 6-week time-point, but at 16 weeks they were as large as native hepatocytes (Fig. 5C).

The size of hepatocytes was also measured in the AAV8-TBG-Cre X Rosa26RYFP mice, confirming the increase in size of unlabelled (non-hepatocyte origin) cells with the progression of the injury (Fig. S10B).

DR-derived hepatocytes had a higher proliferation index (% of Ki67+ cells) (Fig. 5D), a higher percentage of cells expressing cyclin D1 (Fig. S13) or engaged in mitosis (phosphohistone-H3 positive) (Fig. 5E) compared with native hepatocytes, further indicating that proliferation of differentiated mature cells contribute to growth of DR-derived hepatocytes patches

SECTION

DR-derived hepatocytes respond better to stress signals

PARAGRAPH

YFP+ hepatocytes when located in the pericentral area (representing 10% of the YFP+ hepatocytes contingent – [Fig. S8]) express CYP2E1 (Fig. 2C).

Moreover, CYP2E1 and GS were similarly expressed at the same level in the DR-derived and native hepatocyte populations (Fig. S8D).

We therefore assumed that a similar proportion of the 2 cell populations are able to metabolize CCl4 and undergo CCl4-induced damage.

To study the cells’ response to DNA damage, we checked the expression of genes involved in the DNA repair machinery in native (mTomato-Red) and DR-derived (mGFP-Green) injured hepatocytes, sorted after 6 and 8 weeks of CCl4, and compared them with healthy control hepatocytes.

The expression of Brca1, Rad511 and Fanci (encoding for proteins that bind DNA damage site), expression of the gatekeeper Gadd45 as well as of the checkpoint kinases 1 and 2 (Chek1/2) were similarly increased in the 2 populations of native and DR-derived injured hepatocytes compared to the healthy control hepatocytes (Fig. 6A).

Moreover, upon CCl4 exposure, a similar proportion of cells of the YFP+ and YFP− population harbour nuclear γH2AX, a protein that aggregates to DNA breaks (Fig. 6B).

The proportion of TUNEL+ apoptotic cells was however lower in DR-derived than in native hepatocyte populations (Fig. 6C).

Consistently, analysis from RNAseq data confirmed that the native population was enriched in the pathways involved in the regulation of DNA damage, apoptotic process and senescence (Fig. 6D).

PARAGRAPH

Polyploidy, a feature of mature hepatocytes,38 is determined by the number of nuclei per cell (cellular polyploidy) and the DNA content for each nucleus (nuclear polyploidy).

During liver development, polyploidization is mostly associated with modification of cellular polyploidy39 whereas under stress condition nuclear polyploidy is altered.40

Thus, in the context of CCl4 treatment, we have focused on nuclear polyploidy analysis.

Compared to untreated controls, YFP− native hepatocytes display a lower proportion of tetraploid nuclei (4 n), and a higher proportion of highly polyploid nuclei (≥8 n) as expected under CCl4 stress conditions.

By contrast, YFP+ nuclei showed a similar polyploidy profile as untreated livers with a low proportion of highly polyploid nuclei (≥8 n) (Fig. 6E and Fig. S14).

All these results suggest that although native and DR-derived hepatocytes similarly experience DNA damage in ongoing CCl4-injury, DR-derived hepatocytes have a survival advantage over native hepatocytes with less cells driven into death or senescence.

SECTION

DR-derived hepatocytes have a proliferative and DNA repair advantage upon recovery

PARAGRAPH

Thus, newly formed DR-derived hepatocytes have less stress stigmata (and are potentially genetically more stable) and the balance proliferation/death favors their amplification over native hepatocytes.

To verify the repopulation advantage of YFP+ DR-derived cells, we exposed the mice to 16 weeks of CCl4 and allowed the liver to recover for 2 or 4 weeks.

The parenchymal area occupied by YFP+ hepatocytes increased from 4.5% after 16 weeks of CCl4 to 7.5% and up to 13.5% after 2 and 4 weeks recovery, respectively (Fig. 7A-B).

The increase in the number of YFP+ hepatocytes was explained by an increase in the size of YFP+ clusters (Fig. 7C) and not by the number of clusters (not shown) or the cellular size (Fig. 7D).

Although the total number of Ki67+ cells decreased during recovery (Fig. S15), the proliferative index (Fig. 7E,F) and the number of pHH3+ mitotic cells (Fig. 7G) was higher in YFP+ than in YFP− hepatocytes upon recovery.

γ-H2AX accumulates to form foci on damaged DNA to recruit DNA repair by homologous recombination upon injury.

Indeed, as mentioned (Fig. 6B) and as shown in Fig. 7H, the 2 populations of hepatocytes upon injury similarly accumulated nuclear γH2AX.

Persistence of nuclear γH2AX foci once injury has resolved indicate the presence of unrepaired DNA.41

Native hepatocyte retained nuclear γH2AX protein upon recovery while it was rapidly cleaned in YFP+ hepatocytes (Fig. 7H and Fig. S16).

Collectively, these data support the concept that the increased number of DR-derived hepatocytes upon recovery from injury is achieved by effective proliferation of unstressed cells previously differentiated from DR, while YFP− native hepatocytes harbor unrepaired DNA damage and are significantly less replicative.

SECTION

DR-derived hepatocytes are not involved in the development of preneoplastic nodules

PARAGRAPH

The cirrhotic liver is a precancerous organ.

Twenty-four weeks of CCl4 caused macronodular cirrhosis (Fig. 8A-B).

Although YFP staining revealed some cirrhotic nodules entirely composed by YFP+ cells or mosaic YFP+/YFP− (arrows in Fig. 6B), the majority of nodules were nonetheless YFP− (Fig. 8C).

GS expression, a proxy for β-catenin activation described in preneoplastic lesions and a useful marker to identify neoplasia,42 was found in 40% of YFP− nodules and only in 10% of YFP+ regenerative nodules (Fig. 8D-E).

Moreover, in mosaic YFP+/YFP− nodules, GS expression was restricted to YFP− areas while YFP+ DR-derived hepatocytes did not express GS (insert Fig. 8D).

Compared to normal hepatocytes in the undamaged liver, YFP− native hepatocyte nuclei were more often highly polyploid (>8 n) and more rarely tetraploid (4 n) in the cirrhotic liver (Fig. 8F).

By contrast, the level of nuclear polyploidy of DR-derived YFP+ hepatocytes in the cirrhotic liver was comparable to that of hepatocytes in an undamaged liver (Fig. 8F) suggesting, also at this stage of the disease, a higher protection or a better capacity of DR-derived YFP+ cells to manage stress induced by CCl4 treatment.

Similar to Tummala et al.43 we applied to regenerative nodules a composite index based on immunodetection of GS, β-catenin and Ki67 (IHC score) for diagnosis of malignant hepatocellular neoplasms.

The index was low in all cirrhotic nodules compared to scores in proven HCC31 taken as reference (Fig. S17D), but notably the YFP+ nodules had a lower score than the YFP− nodules (Fig. 8G).

Then, we interrogated the susceptibility of native and DR-derived hepatocytes to carcinogenesis, using the carcinogenic agent diethylnitrosamine (Fig. S17A).

Out of 15 mice, 12 developed macroscopic tumors.

Altogether, 26 nodules were diagnosed as HCC (Fig. S17).

They were, however, all YFP− and no YFP+ HCC were found (Fig. S17).

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

Recent studies have established that cells from the biliary compartment give rise to the DR and to functional hepatocytes.15,24,26

The latter has been demonstrated in models in which hepatocellular injury associates with genetic abrogation of their replicative capacity15,24,25 as well as in long-term TAA-injury model.26

However, the kinetics of cell differentiation from a biliary precursor and characterization of the new hepatocytes have not been investigated to date.

PARAGRAPH

The present study was designed to test the efficiency and safety of this alternative regeneration pathway in a model of chronic hepatocellular disease.

We used a model of repeated administration of the hepatotoxic CCl4 to induce repeated rounds of parenchymal necrosis and healing that culminate in cirrhosis, mimicking the evolution and severity of chronic liver injury in humans.

The use of efficient and clean genetic tracing of cholangiocytes,33 or conversely of native hepatocytes, enabled us to monitor the relationship between the DR and the generation of hepatocytes from the DR cell compartment, or from the hepatocyte pool, at various stages of disease progression.

With these tools, our experiments demonstrate that ∼12% of hepatocytes in the chronically ill liver derive from DR differentiation and not from replication of native pre-injury hepatocytes.

In other studies,14,30,44 including previous work from our lab,13 DR cells were not found to contribute to liver regeneration in short term CCl4-induced injury.

The discrepancy results from the experimental protocol and whether it impedes hepatocyte regeneration.

We followed the scheme already published by our lab: 3 injections of CCl4 per week with adaptation of the dose to the body weight.

4 weeks of CCl4, in the current work as in Español-Suner et al.13 caused a discrete DR and no DR-derived hepatocytes were observed.

In the others papers in which the expression “chronic CCl4” was used, CCl4 was administrated only twice a week, for 5, 6 or 8 weeks.14,30,44

None of those papers reported the hepatocyte proliferation, but we can speculate that the dose and timing of the CCl4 injections were not enough to inhibit hepatocyte proliferation.

As evidence for this hypothesis, Pu et al. reported that the periportal Mfsd2a+ native hepatocytes repopulate the liver lobules during “chronic” CCl4, confirming that they are not in a state of replicative senescence.34

PARAGRAPH

Similar to our data, Deng et al. recently published the contribution of cholangiocytes to parenchymal regeneration in a model of long lasting TAA-induced liver disease.26

However, in the TAA model both native and cholangiocyte-derived hepatocytes had similar proliferation, as assessed by Ki67 analysis, leaving the mechanism for the rising proportion of cholangiocyte-derived hepatocytes at this time unexplained.

Consistent with our data, the same authors reported using the AAV8-TBG-Cre;mTmG system, showing that after long-term (24 weeks) TAA insult, mTom+ hepatocytes composed 20% of the parenchyma, i.e. 20% of the hepatocytes did not derive from proliferation of native mGFP+ (and mTom−) hepatocytes.

In the same model, 7% of the hepatocytes were demonstrated to be of biliary origin.

The difference in number might be ascribed to the relatively poor efficiency of biliary labelling in CK19-CreER mice (70%).

By using a similar approach but a much more efficient system to trace biliary cells (>85% efficiency), the patches of hepatocytes that appear after long-term CCl4 in our study were similar in size, whether traced as of DR-origin or, in the mirror experiment, as of non-hepatocytic origin.

PARAGRAPH

In addition, we studied the temporal evolution of the DR differentiation process and found that, in CCl4-induced injury, DR stems from clonal amplification of a discrete population of biliary cells, the identity of which remain to be ascertained.

Thereafter DR cells, or a subset of them undergo complete hepatocytic differentiation yielding functional cells, perfectly organized within the lobular architecture (Fig. 3).

Consistent with studies by Lu et al.16 and Raven et al.24 initial differentiation of DR cells into hepatocytes coincided with the injury-induced drop in replication of native hepatocytes and their entry into senescence as supported by P21 expression, senescence-associated β-galactosidase activity and expression of the senescence-associated gene program (SASP).

PARAGRAPH

Morphometric analyses revealed that early in the process, newly differentiated hepatocytes are small in size and reach a normal size with time while they amplify.

Clonality experiments in confetti mice highlight that all DR-derived hepatocytes within a patch harbor 1 unique fluorescent tag, identical to that expressed by adjacent DR cells, signaling their genetic filiation.

Yet when hepatocyte patches expand, DR vanishes.

These data suggest that during chronic liver injury, DR does not constantly re-fuel the parenchyma with newly differentiated cells, but rather when sufficient and appropriate cellular and environmental conditions are met, a limited contingent of DR cells undergo differentiation then clonal expansion to repopulate up to 12% of the liver.

Further studies will be needed to determine whether the subset of DR cells that are capable of yielding hepatocytes could correspond to ST14hi clonogenic cholangiocytes,45 or Lgr5+ liver stem cells46, or the peripheral ductule described by Kamimoto et al.6.

Pulse labelling of DR cells during disease progression would be required to test this hypothesis.6

PARAGRAPH

Our experimental system also permits the separate analysis of the properties and contribution to regeneration of newly generated hepatocytes and native hepatocytes, i.e. those already present before injury.

At all times in the process, proliferative and mitotic indices are higher in the newly emerged population of hepatocytes than in native hepatocytes.

Cell death by apoptosis and senescence are conversely readily seen in native hepatocytes during chronic exposure to CCl4 but not in adjacent DR-derived hepatocytes, supporting a proliferative advantage of the latter over native hepatocytes.

These findings suggest an explanation for sometimes extensive parenchymal reconstitution in advanced-stage chronic viral hepatitis in humans9 that has not been convincingly demonstrated in acute or mild human hepatic injury or in most animal models of human disease.

As native hepatocytes eventually become damaged and consequently senescent, the DR-derived hepatocytes then begin to repopulate because of their untapped replicative potential.9

This proposal was further supported by a higher proliferation rate of the DR-derived population once the injurious toxin was retrieved, resulting in a significant proportional increase in the lobular area occupied by DR-derived hepatocytes and hence a decreased proportion of native hepatocytes in the lobules.

As a result, DR contributed to the regeneration of a significant proportion of the parenchyma in the chronically injured liver.

PARAGRAPH

The ploidy pattern of DR-derived and native hepatocytes also differed.

As reported elsewhere40 various stress signals, including oxidative stress, provoke a decrease in the proportion of stable tetraploid nuclei and a rise in that of highly polyploid nuclei.

In a context of CCl4 treatment, we observed this precise stress-induced shift in native hepatocytes but not in DR-derived hepatocytes.

Indeed, the latter, although being exposed to CCl4 and appropriately expressing CYP2E1 necessary for CCl4 activation, exhibited a nuclear polyploid pattern similar to that of liver parenchymal cells in an unarmed liver.

This differential ploidy pattern persisted despite continuation of CCl4 administration.

By maintaining a less polyploid genome, DR-derived hepatocytes would, like stem cells do, retain a higher replicative potential with a lower risk of accumulating DNA damage.

In support to this, DR-derived hepatocytes in the healing liver retained less γH2AX foci and thus unrepaired DNA.

Moreover, when exposed to DEN, a carcinogenic agent, native but not DR-derived hepatocytes underwent carcinogenic transformation, highlighting the stress resistance and stability of the latter.

Whether indeed DR-driven regeneration reduces the risk of cancer would need to be confirmed in dedicated studies.

PARAGRAPH

Herein, we have provided evidence that a population of younger and healthier hepatocytes traced from cholangiocytes and not from hepatocytes emerges in an injured liver.

Therefore, stimulation of DR-derived regeneration in vivo appears to be a safe strategy to alleviate liver insufficiency in chronic liver disease.

However, several key issues are awaiting answers.

Our experimental design does not allow for identification of the characteristics that enable (a subset of) biliary cells with reactive capacity to mount the DR (the “target cells” for DR-derived regeneration).

They could correspond to the label retaining cells recently described by Cao et al.47 Also, while failure of mature hepatocytes to divide and regenerate the organ contributes to trigger DR and its differentiation, many other processes activated during wound repair are likely to be involved, such as vascular changes, inflammation, modification of the extracellular matrix scaffold, etc.8,12,48 Whether all small DR-derived hepatocytes undergo clonal expansion and equally contribute to liver regeneration is not answered by the present study.

We observed, when liver disease becomes severe and while the number of DR-derived hepatocytes increases in growing foci, a decline in the total amount of YFP+ cells owing to a drop in the number of small foci.

The absence of mosaicism in DR-derived hepatocyte foci in confetti mice does not support a confluence of growing foci.

Therefore, we suppose that a large proportion of emerging small DR-hepatocytes do not survive in a stressed organ or are not similarly exposed to, or do not similarly respond to, stimuli to enable complete differentiation and proliferation.

A better understanding of the mechanisms supporting DR-derived regeneration is now the next research goal, in order to identify pathways amenable to therapeutic manipulation for the treatment of liver insufficiency.

SECTION

Financial support

PARAGRAPH

This work was supported by grants from the Belgian Federal Science Policy Office (Interuniversity Attraction Poles program, network P7/83-HEPRO2 and from the Fund for Scientific Medical Research (FNRS-PDR T.1067.14-P) to IA.L.

and from unrestricted from Gilead, Belgium.

SECTION

Conflict of interest

PARAGRAPH

The authors declare no competing personal or financial interests.

PARAGRAPH

Please refer to the accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.

SECTION

Authors’ contributions

PARAGRAPH

R.M. designed, conducted the experiments, analyzed and discussed the data, L-A.C.

analyzed and discussed the data, S.V. and LA.

vG.

generated, analyzed and discussed the FACS analysis, analyzed and discussed the RNAseq data, M.B-N.

and C.D. generated, analyzed and discussed the ploidy data, C.S. generated the HIC score and discussed the data, J.A., B.B. and J.L. Gala analyzed and discussed the RNAseq data, Y.H. discussed the hypothesis, study design and data, I.L. designed the experiments, conducted the study, and analyzed and discussed the data; R.M. and I.L. wrote the original manuscript.

All authors read and edited the manuscript.