10.1016/j.jhep.2018.11.033

ABSTRACT

TITLE

A serum protein factor mediates maturation and apoB-association of HCV particles in the extracellular milieu

PARAGRAPH

In the sera of infected patients, hepatitis C virus (HCV) particles display heterogeneous forms with low-buoyant densities (<1.08), underscoring their lipidation via association with apoB-containing lipoproteins, which was proposed to occur during assembly or secretion from infected hepatocytes.

However, the mechanisms inducing this association remain poorly-defined and most cell culture grown HCV (HCVcc) particles exhibit higher density (>1.08) and poor/no association with apoB.

We aimed to elucidate the mechanisms of lipidation and to produce HCVcc particles resembling those in infected sera.

PARAGRAPH

We produced HCVcc particles of Jc1 or H77 strains from Huh-7.5 hepatoma cells cultured in standard conditions (10%-fetal calf serum) vs. in serum-free or human serum conditions before comparing their density profiles to patient-derived virus.

We also characterized wild-type and Jc1/H77 hypervariable region 1 (HVR1)-swapped mutant HCVcc particles produced in serum-free media and incubated with different serum types or with purified lipoproteins.

PARAGRAPH

Compared to serum-free or fetal calf serum conditions, production with human serum redistributed most HCVcc infectious particles to low density (<1.08) or very-low density (<1.04) ranges.

In addition, short-time incubation with human serum was sufficient to shift HCVcc physical particles to low-density fractions, in time- and dose-dependent manners, which increased their specific infectivity, promoted apoB-association and induced neutralization-resistance.

Moreover, compared to Jc1, we detected higher levels of H77 HCVcc infectious particles in very-low-density fractions, which could unambiguously be attributed to strain-specific features of the HVR1 sequence.

Finally, all 3 lipoprotein classes, i.e., very-low-density, low-density and high-density lipoproteins, could synergistically induce low-density shift of HCV particles; yet, this required additional non-lipid serum factor(s) that include albumin.

PARAGRAPH

The association of HCV particles with lipids may occur in the extracellular milieu.

The lipidation level depends on serum composition as well as on HVR1-specific properties.

These simple culture conditions allow production of infectious HCV particles resembling those of chronically-infected patients.

