10.1016/j.jhep.2018.05.008

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Liver regeneration requires Yap1-TGFβ-dependent epithelial-mesenchymal transition in hepatocytes

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Adult liver has robust regenerative capacity as demonstrated by efficient restitution of fully functional liver mass within days to weeks after acute 70% partial hepatectomy (PH) in mice and humans, respectively.1

Paradoxically, chronically dysregulated repair of even minor liver damage causes defective recovery of healthy liver parenchyma and ultimately results in cirrhosis and/or liver cancer.

Preventing these bad outcomes of liver injury is necessary to reduce mortality from liver disease, a major cause of premature death in adulthood worldwide.2

Success has been elusive because of relatively limited understanding of the mechanisms that promote effective reconstruction of this complex organ in adults.

Old dogma posited that adult liver regeneration mainly involved replication of surviving mature hepatocytes.

However, it is becoming clear that reconstruction of healthy liver parenchyma after both acute and chronic injury requires an orderly cascade of diverse repair responses that are precisely and coordinately regulated to assure that all resident liver cell populations are replaced and appropriately integrated to reconstitute diverse tissue-specific functions.

PH is a useful model for teasing apart these regenerative mechanisms.3

PARAGRAPH

Both effective hepatic regenerative responses triggered by PH and dysregulated liver repair responses that cause cirrhosis involve accumulation of myofibroblasts (MF), and both processes are inhibited when MF accumulation is blocked.4,5

Evidence that MFs are master regulators of the regenerative process is not surprising since MFs are known to produce some factors that stimulate hepatocyte growth (e.g., hepatocyte growth factor [HGF]), as well as other factors that inhibit hepatocyte growth (e.g., transforming growth factor-beta 1 [TGFβ]).6

It is conceivable that differences in hepatocyte exposure and/or sensitivity to MF-derived growth regulators determine whether or not regeneration is effective.

In this study, we evaluated the hypothesis that hepatocytes evade the growth-inhibitory actions of TGFβ during effective liver regeneration.

Our results confirm the hypothesis and demonstrate that the mechanism involves changes in hepatocyte fate that depend upon interactions between pSmad2, a TGFβ-regulated transcription factor,7 and Yap1, the Hippo kinase cascade target that promotes liver growth after PH.8–10

SECTION

Materials and methods

SECTION

Animal experiments

PARAGRAPH

Adult male, C57BL/6J wild-type (WT) mice (Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME) and Yap1flox/flox mice on the same genetic background (from Udayan Apte, Univ Kansas) were housed in a barrier facility on 12 h:12 h light cycle with free access to water and standard chow diet (Purina 5053).

Male Yap1flox/flox mice were injected by tail vein with 5 × 1011 genome-equivalents of AAV8-TBG-Luc (control, n = 8 mice) or AAV8-TBG-Cre (n = 8 mice) to selectively delete the Yap1 gene in hepatocytes.

Seven days after viral injection, mice underwent PH. Viruses were obtained from the University of Pennsylvania Viral Vector Core.

PARAGRAPH

At 9–14 weeks of age, 70% PH was performed5 on WT mice (n = 50) or on virus-injected Yap1flox/flox mice (n = 16).

WT mice were sacrificed at 24, 48, 72, or 96 h after PH to obtain either liver tissue (25 mice, n = 5 per time point) or primary hepatocytes (25 mice, n = 5 per time point).

Yap1flox/flox mice were treated with either AAV8-TBG-Luc virus (control) or AAV8-TBG-Cre virus (to delete Yap1 in hepatocytes) and sacrificed before or 48 h after PH to obtain liver tissue (8 mice, n = 4/group/time point) or primary hepatocytes (8 mice, n = 4/group/time point).

At whole liver harvest, slices of liver were formalin-fixed for paraffin embedding and the remainder snap frozen in liquid nitrogen for RNA and protein analysis.

To obtain primary hepatocytes, liver was perfused with collagenase as described,17 without prior PH (time 0), or 24, 48, 72 and 96 h after PH. Hepatocyte preparations were evaluated for viability and purity by light microscopy to assure that viability and purity were at least 95%.

Freshly isolated hepatocytes were immediately processed to obtain RNA and protein.

Animal care and surgical procedures were conducted in compliance with an approved Duke University IACUC protocol, and those set forth in the “Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals” as published by the National Research Council.

SECTION

Two-step real-time RT-PCR and conventional RT-PCR

PARAGRAPH

Total RNA was extracted from primary hepatocytes or whole liver chips using TRIzol (LifeTechnologies, Carlsbad, CA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

First-strand cDNA was prepared by reverse transcription, using 5 µg of DNA-free RNA as a template for the High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription kit (Applied Biosystems).

For reverse transcription semiquantitative PCR (RT-qPCR), 1% of the first-strand reaction was amplified using the StepOne Plus Real-Time PCR Platform (ABI/Life Technologies) and specific intron-spanning oligonucleotide primers for target sequences, as well as the ribosomal Rps9 housekeeping gene as reference control.

RT-qPCR parameters were as follows: denaturation at 95 °C for 3 min, followed by 40 cycles of denaturing at 95 °C for 10 s and annealing/extension at the optimal primer temperature for 60 s. Threshold cycles and product melt temperature were calculated by the StepOne Plus Real-Time Detection System.

Target gene levels are presented as a ratio to levels detected in the corresponding control tissue or cells according to the ΔΔCt method.

Primer sequences are listed (Table S1).

Conventional end-point RT-PCR amplified the same cDNA for 30 cycles, and separated products on 1.5% agarose gel.

SECTION

Immunohistochemistry and quantitation

PARAGRAPH

Liver tissues were fixed in formalin and embedded in paraffin blocks using standard methods.

Immunohistochemistry was used to detect target proteins using the following antibodies: rat-anti-Ki67 (MP-7444, DAKO Corp., Santa Clara, CA), pSmad2 (3108, Cell Signaling, Danvers, MA; ab188334, Abcam, Cambridge, MA), E-cadherin (AF748, R & D Systems, Minneapolis, MN), albumin (sc-50536, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA) and αSMA (ab32575, Abcam).

Secondary antibodies were HRP-conjugated anti-rabbit (K4003, DAKO), anti-rat (MP-7444, Vector, Burlingame, CA) and anti-goat (sc-2922, Santa Cruz) antibodies.

Blocking and chromogenic detection was performed using the DAKO Envision System with DAB substrate (DAKO Corporation) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.

Tissue sections were counterstained with Aqua Hematoxylin-INNOVEX (Innovex Biosciences).

Negative controls included liver specimens exposed to 1% bovine serum albumin instead of the respective primary antibodies.

The numbers of Ki67 and pSmad2 immunoreactive nuclei were quantified by counting 40 randomly chosen 20x fields per mouse.

SECTION

Western blot analysis

PARAGRAPH

Total liver and isolated hepatocyte lysates were prepared using RIPA buffer with protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich Corp.

St Louis, MO).

For western blotting, primary antibodies used included rabbit anti-pSmad2 (Abcam or Cell Signaling as above), goat anti-E-cadherin (R & D), rabbit anti-albumin (Santa Cruz), rabbit anti-αSMA (Abcam), and rabbit anti-Yap1 (Cell Signaling).

HRP-conjugated anti-rabbit or mouse (GE Healthcare, Pittsburgh, PA) and donkey anti-goat (Santa Cruz) were used as secondary antibodies.

Signal was developed using ECL Prime (GE Healthcare) with detection on a Chemidoc system (BioRad) or using DAB reagent (DAKO).

SECTION

In situ RT-PCR hybridization

PARAGRAPH

Direct in situ RT-PCR hybridization for detection of alpha smooth muscle actin (αSMA [Acta2]) mRNA expression was performed on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded liver slices.

Slides were treated with DNase1 to inhibit non-specific reaction.

Reverse transcription and detection was performed as previously described.18

SECTION

Statistics

PARAGRAPH

All data are expressed as mean ± SEM.

Statistical analysis was performed using Student’s t test as indicated.

Differences with p ≤0.05 were considered statistically significant.

PARAGRAPH

For further details regarding the materials used, please refer to the CTAT table.

SECTION

Results

SECTION

TGFβ signaling increases in hepatocytes during liver regeneration

PARAGRAPH

Hepatocyte replication is barely detectable in healthy adult liver but increases dramatically after PH in humans and mice.

In both species, the increased hepatocyte proliferative activity is transient.

The window of high hepatocyte proliferation occurs from 24–96 h after PH in mice, with maximal hepatocyte proliferation occurring at ∼48 h as demonstrated by an over 100-fold increase in hepatocyte nuclear accumulation of the proliferation marker, Ki67 (Fig. 1A).

Surprisingly, this induction of hepatocyte proliferative activity temporally coincides with a significant increase in hepatic TGFβ (Tgfb1) expression.

Our RT-qPCR analysis of TGFβ expression in whole liver extracts from regenerating liver remnants, as well as similar analysis of primary hepatocytes that were freshly isolated at various time points after PH, shows that whole liver TGFβ expression is eightfold increased by 24 h after PH and remains at this level through 48 h (Fig. 1B), the time point when hepatocyte proliferative activity is maximal (Fig. 1A).

Cells other than hepatocytes are the predominant source of TGFβ during the early time frame (i.e. 24–48 h), because hepatocytes themselves maximally upregulate their own production of TGFβ from 72–96 h after PH when total liver TGFβ mRNA is returning to basally low levels (Fig. 1B).

PARAGRAPH

To determine if these net increases in hepatic TGFβ expression during the time period of maximal hepatocyte proliferative activity influenced TGFβ signaling in hepatocytes, we evaluated accumulation of phosphorylated Smad2 (pSmad2) in hepatocyte nuclei using immunohistochemical staining of liver sections and immunoblot analysis of nuclear extracts prepared from primary hepatocytes freshly isolated at various times after PH (Fig. 1C).

Both approaches demonstrated very little pSmad2 in hepatocyte nuclei before PH, a time when TGFβ mRNA expression is very low in primary hepatocytes and in whole liver (Fig. 1B).

In contrast, striking accumulation of pSmad2 was evident in hepatocyte nuclei after PH, with maximal pSmad2 accumulation occurring from 48–72 h after PH (Fig. 1C) when hepatocyte proliferative activity is maximal (Fig. 1A).

TGFβ-driven activation of pSmad2 is known to induce transcription of Snai1.11–13

Therefore, we assessed Snai1 mRNA expression in hepatocytes at various times after PH to determine if post-PH accumulation of pSmad2 in hepatocyte nuclei resulted in increased pSmad2 activity in those cells (Fig. 1D).

Snai1 expression was low in hepatocytes before PH but increased significantly from 24–72 h after PH. Thus, the aggregate data show that PH induces hepatic TGFβ expression and increases TGFβ signaling in hepatocytes.

Further, the results clearly demonstrate that this is not sufficient to prevent hepatocyte proliferation.

The fact that hepatocytes flourish in remnant livers after PH despite enrichment of their microenvironment with a factor that inhibits mature hepatocyte growth, suggests that TGFβ signaling might actually enable hepatocytes in regenerating livers to evade the typical growth-inhibitory actions of TGFβ on hepatic epithelial cells.

SECTION

Hepatocytes in regenerating livers transiently downregulate epithelial markers

PARAGRAPH

TGFβ is known to stimulate the growth of mesenchymal cells.

It also promotes epithelial-to-mesenchymal transitions (EMT) in many types of epithelial cells during fetal development, as well as various epithelial cancers in adulthood.13

In contrast, it is widely believed that mature hepatocytes in adult livers do not undergo EMT after liver injury.14–17

Nevertheless, we investigated the possibility that hepatocytes might undergo some elements of an EMT response (a.k.a., “partial EMT”) after PH based on our data showing that PH increased TGFβ expression (Fig. 1B) and activated TGFβ signaling mechanisms, including induction of Snai1, a pro-EMT transcription factor, in hepatocytes (Fig. 1C, D).

One characteristic epithelial marker prominent in hepatocytes is E-cadherin.

We used three different approaches to evaluate E-cadherin expression in hepatocytes after PH. RT-qPCR analysis demonstrated a transient suppression of E-cadherin (Cdh1) mRNA levels in hepatocytes freshly isolated from mice 24 or 48 h after PH (Fig. 2A).

Quantitative immunoblot analysis of protein extracts from these hepatocytes demonstrated a comparable reduction of E-cadherin protein content (Fig. 2C).

These changes were not likely to be an artefact of the isolation protocol because they were not evident in three other groups of hepatocytes, all of which were isolated at other time points (0, 72, 96 h) via an identical approach.

Further, the findings were confirmed by immunostaining of intact liver sections (Fig. 2A and Fig. S1).

This method demonstrated strong localization of E-cadherin staining along the membrane of zone 1–2 hepatocytes before PH, and showed that this was significantly reduced after PH. Because E-cadherin expression is lower in zone 3 hepatocytes in healthy liver, it is unclear how expression or localization changes in these hepatocytes after PH. Importantly, however, downregulation of hepatocyte E-cadherin expression was accompanied by suppression of another widely-accepted marker of mature hepatocytes, albumin (Fig. 2B, C and Fig. S1).

Albumin (Alb) mRNA expression and albumin protein content decreased significantly in hepatocytes that were freshly isolated from regenerating liver remnants at 24–48 h after PH, findings that were paralleled by reduced albumin staining of intact liver sections at these same time points.

SECTION

Hepatocytes in regenerating livers transiently acquire myofibroblast markers and produce collagen

PARAGRAPH

In cells undergoing EMT, loss of epithelial markers is accompanied by gain of mesenchymal characteristics.18

Therefore, we used equally rigorous approaches to determine if hepatocytes upregulate mesenchymal genes after PH. Our initial analysis focused on αSMA because this gene is thought to be a highly specific marker of myofibroblasts and smooth muscle cells.19–21

Immunostaining of intact liver sections demonstrated the expected localization of αSMA to stromal cells and portal tracts prior to PH. After PH, αSMA staining became diffuse and strongly stained zone 2–3 hepatocytes at 48 h (Fig. 3A, Fig. S1).

RT-qPCR and immunoblot analysis of primary hepatocytes that were freshly isolated from liver remnants at various times after PH confirmed that hepatocytes upregulated expression of αSMA mRNA and protein during the regenerative process (Fig. 3B).

We also performed end-point RT-PCR analysis (Fig. 3C), as well as single cell immunocytochemistry and RNA RT-PCR in situ hybridization (Fig. 3D) to better characterize this response.

All three of these complementary methods also indicated that hepatocytes in regenerating livers upregulate their expression of αSMA mRNA and accumulate αSMA protein.

We counted cells that did or did not stain for αSMA in immunostained cytospins of hepatocytes that were isolated 48 h post-PH because immunostained liver sections had suggested that αSMA induction was heterogeneous in hepatocytes at 48 h after PH (Fig. 3A, Fig. S1).

On average approximately one out of five hepatocytes (20.96 + 1.08%) expressed αSMA protein at this time point.

The heterogeneous nature of hepatocyte αSMA induction after PH was confirmed by RNA RT-PCR in situ hybridization (Fig. 3D).

PARAGRAPH

Myofibroblasts are a major source of collagen in injured livers and so we evaluated hepatocytes that were freshly isolated from regenerating liver remnants for collagen gene expression (Fig. 4A) and hydroxyproline content (Fig. 4B).

RT-qPCR analysis demonstrated significant increases in hepatocyte levels of Col1a1 mRNA after PH. Because this approach normalizes gene expression in regenerating hepatocytes to that of non-proliferative hepatocytes before PH, and Col1a1 mRNA is barely detectable in the non-proliferative hepatocytes, we also performed end-point RT-PCR analysis to better visualize effects on Col1a1 gene expression (Fig. 4A).

As expected, Col1a1 mRNA was detected in whole liver extracts at baseline and increased after PH. RT-PCR analysis of equivalent amounts of primary hepatocyte mRNA was unable to demonstrate Col1a1 mRNA in non-regenerating hepatocytes but clearly revealed Col1a1 gene expression in hepatocytes from regenerating liver remnants.

Consistent with this induction of Col1a1 gene expression, regenerating hepatocytes also produced more fibrous matrix, as demonstrated by biochemical analysis of hydroxyproline content of isolated hepatocytes (Fig. 4B).

Thus, the aggregate data suggest that hepatocytes undergo an EMT-like process to transiently acquire mesenchymal, myofibroblastic traits during an effective regenerative response.

As mentioned earlier, TGFβ is a growth factor for mesenchymal cells but generally inhibits hepatocyte proliferation.22

Yet, our data demonstrate increased TGFβ signaling in hepatocyte populations during the time window when they are maximally proliferative after PH (Fig. 1).

Our in situ hybridization studies demonstrated αSMA mRNA in the nuclei of an actively dividing hepatocyte (Fig. 3D, black arrow).

This finding supports the concept that the EMT might permit some hepatocytes to evade the growth-inhibitory actions of TGFβ.

PARAGRAPH

Indeed, we found that other well-known mesenchymal cell markers, such as Mmp9, Vim and Zeb1, were also induced in hepatocytes after PH (Fig. 4C).

Therefore, to further investigate the possibility that the EMT-like response might promote hepatocyte proliferation, we evaluated expression of Qsox1, a matrix remodeling factor that is thought to be specifically induced by proliferative fibroblastic cells as they exit the cell cycle.23

Primary hepatocytes do not express this gene before PH but gradually upregulate its expression after PH, and Qsox1 mRNA levels peak in the hepatocyte compartment at 72 h (Fig. 4D) as their proliferative activity is waning (Fig. 1A).

This finding provides additional evidence that hepatocytes must undergo a fate change that makes them less epithelial and more myofibroblastic in order to regenerate effectively when their microenvironment becomes enriched with TGFβ.

However, because this conclusion significantly challenges existing dogma about hepatocyte EMT and hepatocyte regeneration after PH, it is imperative to identify the mechanisms responsible and manipulate them to prove that the process is truly required for effective liver repair.

SECTION

Targeted deletion of Yap1 in hepatocytes inhibits TGFβ signaling, EMT, and proliferation after PH

PARAGRAPH

There is strong experimental evidence that growth of the liver after PH requires activation of Yap1, an ultimate target of the Hippo kinase cascade.

Hippo kinase activity culminates in Yap1 phosphorylation that targets Yap1 for degradation and precludes its accumulation in cell nuclei where it functions as a transcriptional co-activator/co-repressor to regulate cell proliferation and differentiation.

Molecular approaches that delete components of the Hippo kinase cascade in mice prevent Yap1 phosphorylation, permit nuclear accumulation of non-phosphorylated (activated) Yap1, and prevent the cessation of liver growth after PH, causing massive hepatomegaly and liver cancer.24

Further, targeted expression of Yap1 transgenes that cannot be phosphorylated in adult hepatocytes of healthy liver causes constitutive Yap1 activation and is sufficient to cause hepatocytes to de-differentiate into cells with stem-like characteristics, including robust regenerative capability.25

Interestingly, Yap1 activation has been reported to promote nuclear accumulation of pSmad226–28 and activated Yap1 promotes EMT during development and in some malignancies, including primary liver cancers.29

PARAGRAPH

To determine if Yap1 influences pSmad2 accumulation in hepatocyte nuclei after PH, we first verified that Yap1 was absent in the nuclear compartment of freshly isolated hepatocytes.

Indeed, immunostaining was unable to demonstrate nuclear Yap1 in hepatocytes immediately after isolation (Fig. S2).

However, those studies also demonstrated that Yap1 began to accumulate in hepatocyte nuclei as rapidly as 15 min after isolation and showed that nuclear Yap1 was present in most hepatocytes by an hour after isolation.

Therefore, we were careful to prepare nuclear extracts only from hepatocytes that were freshly isolated from quiescent (time 0) livers and from regenerating livers.

These extracts were then processed to immunoprecipitate pSMAD2 and blotted for pSmad2 or Yap1 (Fig. 4E).

As predicted by our earlier results (Fig. 1C and Ref; 30), nuclear extracts from regenerating hepatocytes were enriched with pSmad2 and Yap1.

These results were confirmed when Yap1 immunoprecipitates were blotted for pSmad2 (Fig. 4E), whereas pSmad2 was not identified when immunoprecipitation was performed with a non-specific antibody (e.g. anti-mouse IgG) (Fig. 4E).

Hence, the co-immunoprecipitation approach revealed that pSmad2 and Yap1 physically interact in nuclei of regenerating hepatocytes and showed that complexes containing both proteins were particularly enriched from 24–48 h post-PH (Fig. 4E), the time period when hepatocyte EMT and proliferative responses were maximal (Figs. 1–4).

To clarify the significance of this pSmad2-Yap1 interaction, we used Yap1-floxed mice31 to delete Yap1 specifically in hepatocytes.

Briefly, mice were injected with a hepatocyte-tropic AAV8 virus bearing Cre recombinase (AAV8-TBG-Cre) using a protocol that many groups have used to specifically delete floxed alleles in hepatocytes.30–32

We injected mice with the active AAV8-TBG-Cre virus or control virus (AAV8-TBG-Luc) seven days before PH, confirmed previous reports33 that this vector selectively targets hepatocytes (data not shown), and examined Yap1 mRNA expression in hepatocytes that were isolated before or 48 h after PH. Using this approach, Yap1 mRNA levels were more than 80% reduced in hepatocytes at 48 h after PH (Fig. 5A).

Consistent with the published effects of Yap1 on hepatocyte proliferative activity34, deleting Yap1 in hepatocytes reduced hepatocyte proliferative activity by ∼50% in mice with Yap1-depleted hepatocytes, as shown by staining liver sections obtained at 48 h after PH to reveal nuclear accumulation of Ki67, a marker of hepatocyte replication (Fig. 5B).

To evaluate how Yap1 activation and hepatocyte proliferative activity relate to EMT at 48 h post-PH, mesenchymal markers were compared in hepatocytes with and without Yap1.

Yap1-depleted hepatocytes expressed lower levels of various mesenchymal markers that are typically upregulated in regenerating hepatocytes (Figs. 1D, 4C), including Snai1, Mmp9 and Qsox1 (Fig. 5A).

Western blot analysis of hepatocytes harvested 48 h post-PH from mice that were treated before PH with control virus (Luc) confirmed co-expression of Yap1 and αSMA, whereas hepatocytes from mice that were treated with AAV8-TBG-Cre virus to delete Yap1 in hepatocytes (Cre) expressed neither Yap1 nor αSMA (Fig. 5C).

The aggregate data show that Yap1 is required for hepatocytes to become more myofibroblastic and proliferative after PH. To determine if this process results from Yap1-related nuclear localization of pSmad2 in hepatocytes, immunocytochemistry (Fig. 5D) and immunoblot analysis (Fig. 5E) were performed to compare the nuclear content of Yap1 and pSmad2 in primary hepatocytes isolated at 48 h post-PH from Luc-treated vs. Cre-treated mice.

About two-thirds of the hepatocytes isolated from control mice (Luc) had nuclear staining for pSmad2 vs. less than 10% of the hepatocytes from Yap1-depleted mice (Fig. 5D).

These findings were confirmed by western blot analysis (Fig. 5E), which showed that hepatocyte nuclear extracts from Cre-treated mice were depleted of both Yap1 and pSmad2 at 48 h post-PH.

The results indicate that Yap1 activation is critical for pSmad2 to accumulate in hepatocyte nuclei during the regenerative process.

The aggregate data identify a novel mechanism that helps to explain how Yap1 promotes liver growth.

Namely, activating Yap1 in hepatocytes enhances nuclear accumulation of pSmad2 and this induces a fate change in hepatocytes that enables them to acquire mesenchymal traits that enable them to escape TGFβ growth inhibition.

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

Our study indicates that populations of hepatocytes undergo a process that resembles EMT during the time period when hepatocytes proliferate so that the liver can regenerate effectively after partial hepatectomy.

Further, our results identify the mechanism that drives this response and demonstrate that it involves interactions between the TGFβ and Hippo-Yap1 signaling cascades that have been reported to promote TGFβ signaling and EMT in cancer cells,24,29 but which were not known to occur in normal adult hepatocytes.

Our findings are important because they suggest that shared Yap1-dependent mechanisms orchestrate both the regeneration of non-malignant hepatocytes and the growth of liver cancer cells.

This insight is intriguing because partial hepatectomy has long been used to enhance drug-induced hepatocarcinogenesis in rodents,35 and chronic hepatic regenerative activity increases the risk of cancer development in many liver diseases.36–38

PARAGRAPH

Our data also provide a novel perspective on the strong relationship between liver fibrosis and liver cancer.

The major risk factor for primary liver cancer is cirrhosis37 and cirrhosis is the ultimate consequence of progressive liver fibrosis.2

TGFβ signaling is a key driver of liver fibrosis, but attention has focused on its role in promoting accumulation of myofibroblastic stellate cells because hepatocyte EMT does not seem to occur in chronically injured livers, based on most studies that relied on lineage-tracing approaches to map hepatocyte fate.14–17

Given this background, our new evidence that hepatocytes in regenerating livers can undergo an EMT-like process and actually produce collagen 1α1 transiently after PH is likely to be met with skepticism.

Hence, it is important to emphasize that although our data about endogenous Yap1 and hepatocyte EMT during an effective adult regenerative response are compelling, further research is required to determine if hepatocytes undergo EMT and contribute to fibrosis progression when defective regenerative responses cause cirrhosis.

That said, the present results are entirely consistent with the effects that have been shown to follow experimental manipulation of Yap1 in many cell types, including hepatocytes.

Importantly, constitutive activation of Yap1 in adult hepatocytes has been reported to promote de-differentiation of hepatocytes into highly regenerative stem-like cells, as well as myofibroblast accumulation and liver fibrosis.25,29

Also, in many cancers and during development, stem-like cells exhibit a mesenchymal phenotype.13,18,39

Further, activation of Yap1 in epithelial cells is well-known to stimulate them to undergo an EMT, while suppressing Yap1 activation in mesenchymal cells permits a mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition that enables those cells to acquire more epithelial characteristics.

Indeed, during development, cell-cell contact that leads to formation of adherens junctions promotes Hippo kinase activity that increases phosphorylation and de-activation of Yap1 to establish non-proliferative epithelial structures.

Conversely, factors that destroy epithelial integrity also disrupt adherens junctions, reduce Hippo kinase activity, and activate Yap1 to permit the migration of residual epithelial cells into the stroma where they proliferate until the biomass of the former epithelium has been replenished and then an mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition ensues to reconstitute the epithelial structure.40

Evidence that similar Yap1-regulated changes in hepatocyte plasticity are necessary for effective regrowth of adult hepatic epithelia after PH is novel and paradigm-shifting for the fields of liver regeneration, cirrhosis, and primary liver cancer.

The findings suggest that failure to appropriately regulate hepatocyte plasticity is central to the pathogenesis of cirrhosis and liver cancer, diseases that result from defective liver repair.

This provocative concept opens new areas for further investigation and if confirmed by future research, would identify novel therapeutic targets to prevent the two major causes of liver-related mortality in adults.

SECTION

Financial support

PARAGRAPH

This work was supported by NIH grants R56 DK106633, R01 DK077794 and R37 AA010154.

Funders had no involvement is study design, interpretation or decision to publish.

SECTION

Conflict of interest

PARAGRAPH

The authors declare no conflicts of interest that pertain to this work.

PARAGRAPH

Please refer to the accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.

SECTION

Authors’ contributions

PARAGRAPH

Study conception and design (SHO, AMD), performed experiments (SHO, MSS, MLJ, RTP), data analysis and interpretation (SHO, MSS, MLJ, RTP, AMD), wrote manuscript (SHO, RTP, AMD), obtained funding (AMD).