10.1016/j.jhep.2019.11.007

ABSTRACT

TITLE

The Phosphatidylethanolamine Biosynthesis Pathway Provides a New Target for Cancer Chemotherapy

PARAGRAPH

Since iPSC human develop into hepatic organoids through stages that resemble human embryonic liver development, they can be used to study developmental processes and disease pathology.

Therefore, we examined the early stages of hepatic organoid formation to identify key pathways affecting early liver development.

PARAGRAPH

Single cell RNA-sequencing and metabolomic analysis was performed on developing organoid cultures at the iPSC, hepatoblast (day 9) and mature organoid stage.

The importance of the phosphatidyl-ethanolamine biosynthesis pathway to early liver development was examined in developing organoid cultures using iPSC with a CRISPR-mediated gene knockout and an over the counter medication (meclizine) that inhibits the rate-limiting enzyme in this pathway.

Meclizine’s effect on the growth of a human hepatocarcinoma cell line in a xenotransplantation model and on the growth of acute myeloid leukemia cells in vitro was also examined.

PARAGRAPH

Transcriptomic and metabolomic analysis of organoid development indicated that the phosphatidyl-ethanolamine biosynthesis pathway is essential for early liver development.

Unexpectedly, early hepatoblasts were selectively sensitive to the cytotoxic effect of meclizine.

We demonstrate that meclizine could be repurposed for use in a new synergistic combination therapy for primary liver cancer: a glycolysis inhibitor reprograms cancer cell metabolism to make it susceptible to the cytotoxic effect of meclizine.

This combination inhibited the growth of a human liver carcinoma cell line in vitro; and in a xenotransplantation model without causing significant side effets.

This drug combination was also highly active against acute myeloid leukemic cells.

PARAGRAPH

Our data indicates that the phosphatidyl-ethanolamine biosynthesis is a targetable pathway for cancer; and that meclizine may have clinical efficacy as a repurposed anti-cancer drug when used as part of a new combination therapy.

