10.1016/j.jhep.2018.02.024

ABSTRACT

TITLE

Gut microbiota mediates diurnal variation of acetaminophen induced acute liver injury in mice

PARAGRAPH

Acetaminophen (APAP) induced hepatotoxicity is a leading cause of acute liver failure worldwide.

It is well established that the liver damage induced by acetaminophen exhibits diurnal variation.

However, the detailed mechanism for the hepatotoxic variation is not clear.

Herein, we aimed to determine the relative contributions of gut microbiota in modulating the diurnal variation of hepatotoxicity induced by APAP.

PARAGRAPH

Male Balb/C mice were treated with or without antibiotics and a single dose of orally administered APAP (300 mg/kg) at ZT0 (when the light is on-start of resting period) and ZT12 (when the light is off-start of active period).

PARAGRAPH

In agreement with previous findings, hepatic injury was markedly enhanced at ZT12 compared with ZT0.

Interestingly, upon antibiotic treatment, ZT12 displayed a protective effect against APAP hepatotoxicity similar to ZT0.

Moreover, mice that received the cecal content from ZT12 showed more severe liver damage than mice that received the cecal content from ZT0.

16S sequencing data revealed significant differences in the cecal content between ZT0 and ZT12 in the compositional level.

Furthermore, metabolomic analysis showed that the gut microbial metabolites were also different between ZT0 and ZT12.

Specifically, the level of 1-phenyl-1,2-propanedione (PPD) was significantly higher at ZT12 than ZT0.

Treatment with PPD alone did not cause obvious liver damage.

However, PPD synergistically enhanced APAP-induced hepatic injury in vivo and in vitro.

Finally, we found Saccharomyces cerevisiae, which could reduce intestinal PPD levels, was able to markedly alleviate APAP-induced liver damage at ZT12.

PARAGRAPH

The gut microbial metabolite PPD was responsible, at least in part, for the diurnal variation of hepatotoxicity induced by APAP by decreasing glutathione levels.

