10.1016/j.jhep.2019.01.033

ABSTRACT

TITLE

A central hydrophobic E1 region controls the pH range of hepatitis C virus membrane fusion and susceptibility to fusion inhibitors

PARAGRAPH

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection causes chronic liver disease.

Antivirals have been developed and cure infection.

However, resistance can emerge and salvage therapies with alternative modes of action could be useful.

Several licensed drugs have emerged as HCV entry inhibitors and are thus candidates for drug repurposing.

We aimed to dissect their mode of action, identify improved derivatives and determine their viral targets.

PARAGRAPH

HCV entry inhibition was tested for a panel of structurally related compounds, using chimeric viruses representing diverse genotypes, in addition to viruses containing previously determined resistance mutations.

Chemical modeling and synthesis identified improved derivatives, while generation of susceptible and non-susceptible chimeric viruses pinpointed E1 determinants of compound sensitivity.

PARAGRAPH

Molecules of the diphenylpiperazine, diphenylpiperidine, phenothiazine, thioxanthene, and cycloheptenepiperidine chemotypes inhibit HCV infection by interfering with membrane fusion.

These molecules and a novel p-methoxy-flunarizine derivative with improved efficacy preferentially inhibit genotype 2 viral strains.

Viral residues within a central hydrophobic region of E1 (residues 290–312) control susceptibility.

At the same time, viral features in this region also govern pH-dependence of viral membrane fusion.

PARAGRAPH

Small molecules from different chemotypes related to flunarizine preferentially inhibit HCV genotype 2 membrane fusion.

A hydrophobic region proximal to the putative fusion loop controls sensitivity to these drugs and the pH range of membrane fusion.

An algorithm considering viral features in this region predicts viral sensitivity to membrane fusion inhibitors.

Resistance to flunarizine correlates with more relaxed pH requirements for fusion.

