10.1016/j.jhep.2017.11.029

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Type I interferon receptor signaling delays Kupffer cell replenishment during acute fulminant viral hepatitis

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Many different viral infections can cause acute hepatitis that may result in acute liver failure.

Besides infections with hepatotropic virus (e.g., hepatitis B virus and hepatitis C virus) other viruses such as cytomegalovirus (CMV) can cause acute hepatitis.1–5

Yet, it is unclear to what extent viral pathogenicity or immunopathology cause liver damage.

The liver is the central metabolic organ, which is characterized by a tolerogenic environment.

Hepatic sinusoids are populated with antigen-presenting cells such as Kupffer cells (KC).

KC are self-maintaining liver-resident macrophages, which shape the local immune milieu.6–8

During homeostasis, KC display an overall anti-inflammatory phenotype (M2-like phenotype) and primarily work as scavenger cells that eliminate insoluble macromolecules and antigens from blood.9–11

Upon infection, KC express enhanced levels of scavenger receptors, take up and kill invading pathogens, and express major histocompatibility complex class II molecules to present antigens (M1-like phenotype).8,12

Macrophage-depleted mice show enhanced susceptibility to infection with viruses and bacteria.13,14

Furthermore, liver-infiltrating monocytes can contribute to KC responses and differentiate to DC or monocyte-derived macrophages (MoMF).15–17

PARAGRAPH

Type I interferon (IFN-I) is an anti-viral cytokine that is induced early after infection, confers direct anti-viral effects, and modulates immune cell functions.18,19

Previous studies showed that IFN-I, which is produced in the liver by myeloid cells during many infections, significantly contributes to anti-viral defense.13,15,20,21

Furthermore, in poly(I:C)-treated mice, IFN-I receptor (IFNAR) triggering of myeloid cells results in IL-1RA expression, which protects mice from severe liver damage.22

In contrast, upon lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) infection, IFNAR triggering enhances immunopathology within the liver by inducing oxidative damage in hepatocytes.23,24

PARAGRAPH

Herein, we performed infection studies with two different DNA viruses, vaccinia virus (VACV) and murine cytomegalovirus (MCMV), which both encode several potent IFN-I evasion proteins.25–27

Both viruses efficiently infect the liver and cause acute hepatitis.28,29

Previous studies revealed that in VACV-infected mice IFN-I responses are not detectable in the serum,26,30 nevertheless, IFNAR−/− mice show enhanced susceptibility to lethal VACV infection.31

Interestingly, we detected induction of local IFN-I expression in the liver of VACV-infected mice.

This local IFN-I not only conferred anti-viral effects but also modulated inflammatory responses of myeloid cells and delayed differentiation of infiltrating monocytes to KC.

Similar observations were made upon MCMV infection, highlighting the modulatory role of local IFN-I responses during acute fulminant viral hepatitis.

SECTION

Material and methods

SECTION

Mice and viruses

PARAGRAPH

C57BL/6 (WT) (Harlan Winkelmann), IFNAR−/− (IFNAR1),31 IFN-βWT/Δβ-luc,32 Mx2-luc,33 Cx3cr1+/gfp,34 Mx-Cre+/−Rosa26eYFPST/ST,35,36 Alb-Cre+/−IFNARfl/fl,37 and LysM-Cre+/−IFNARfl/fl mice38,39 were bred under specific pathogen free conditions at the central animal facility of TWINCORE or the Helmholtz Center for Infection Research (HZI), Brunswig, Germany.

For the generation of mixed bone marrow (BM) chimeras, BM cells from CD45.1+ WT and CD45.2+ IFNAR−/− donors were mixed at a 1:1 ratio.

One day after lethal irradiation of CD45.1+ WT recipients, 1×106 mixed BM cells were transplanted intravenously (i.v.).

Chimerism was determined by FACS analysis.

Mouse experimental work was carried out using 8- to 16-week-old mice in compliance with regulations of the German animal welfare law.

VACV strain Western Reserve (originally provided by Bernard Moss, NIH, Bethesda, MD) was propagated on BHK-21 cells.

MCMV-Δm157 (MCMV)40 was provided by Stefan Jordan (Icahn School of Medicine, New York).

Viral stocks were purified by sucrose density gradient ultracentrifugation.

To determine viral loads, organ homogenates were titrated on RK13 cells and plaque-forming units (pfu) per gram tissue were determined.

In all infection experiments mice were i.v. infected with 2×106 pfu VACV, or 5×105 pfu MCMV.

SECTION

In vivo imaging

PARAGRAPH

Reporter mice were i.v. injected with 3 mg of D-luciferin (PerkinElmer) diluted in PBS and anesthetized using 2.5% isoflurane (Abbott).

The emitted light signals were measured in an IVIS SpectrumCT (Caliper) and the photon flux was analyzed with Living Image 4.5 software (Caliper).

SECTION

Quantification of enzyme–activity

PARAGRAPH

Serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), and creatinine levels were determined using commercially available kits from Fuji DRI-CHEM NX500.

SECTION

Histology

PARAGRAPH

For paraffin staining, livers were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde and paraffin-embedded.

Sections of 2 µm were cut and deparaffinized, rehydrated, and boiled at 100 °C.

Liver sections were stained with hematoxylin-and-eosin or immunolabeled with F4/80, caspase 3, or inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) specific antibodies (automated BOND-MAX stainer with Bond Polymer Refine Detection Kit (Leica)).

Images were acquired with a Leica SCN400 Slide Scanner and quantified using Leica Digital Image Hub software.

For cryosections, livers were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde and dehydrated in 30% sucrose solution before freezing in Tissue-Tek (Sakura).

Sections of 6 µm were cut and immunolabeled with primary antibodies specifically binding F4/80, albumin, or VACV.

Photographs were taken on an Axiovert microscope (Zeiss) with AxioVision software.

Original pictures were adjusted for brightness, contrast, and color balance and post processed using Fiji software (NIH).

Cell counting was performed using Fiji software.

SECTION

Cell isolation, flow cytometry, and cell sorting

PARAGRAPH

Mononuclear cell isolation from the liver was performed as previously described.41

After in situ perfusion and in vitro digestion of the liver, cells were filtered through 70 µm cell strainers and centrifuged at 300 g for 8 min at 4 °C.

The cell pellet was resuspended in 33% Percoll and centrifuged at 500 g for 15 min at room temperature.

Following red blood cell lysis (Sigma) cells were immunolabeled with fluorochrome-conjugated antibodies (Biolegend and BD) for flow-cytometry analysis (LSR II Sorb, Becton Dickinson) or cell sorting (MoFlo XDP, Beckman Coulter or FACSAria fusion sorter Becton Dickinson).

SECTION

Statistical analysis

PARAGRAPH

Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 6 software.

If not indicated otherwise, all data shown was pooled from 2–4 independent experiments.

PARAGRAPH

For further information on single mouse strains, antibodies, and software used please refer to the CTAT table and supplementary information.

SECTION

Results

PARAGRAPH

Previously, we found that VACV-infected mice do not mount IFN-I responses in the serum.26,30

Nevertheless, in vivo imaging experiments with VACV-infected IFN-βWT/Δβ-luc reporter mice revealed that local IFN-β expression was induced within secondary lymphoid organs as well as in the liver (Fig. 1A, B).

In order to test whether this locally expressed IFN-β also translated into biologically active protein, we analyzed Mx2-luc mice reporting on IFN-I receptor (IFNAR) triggering.

Indeed, upon VACV infection of such mice, a dominant luciferase signal was detected within the liver (Fig. 1C, D).

WT mice survived systemic VACV infection with mild signs of disease, whereas IFNAR−/− mice showed significant body weight loss, high viral titers in the liver, and succumbed to the infection within five days post infection (dpi) (Fig. 2A–C).

In VACV-infected IFNAR−/− mice the liver damage was further illustrated by elevated ALT and AST serum levels (Fig. 2D), whereas creatinine serum levels were normal, indicating that VACV infection did not impair kidney function (Fig. 2D).

PARAGRAPH

To determine cell types that were directly infected by VACV, we performed immunohistochemical analysis of the liver.

Interestingly, in both WT and IFNAR−/− mice, hepatocytes were infected (Fig. 2E) indicating that IFNAR deletion does not change the viral tropism.

In addition, primary hepatocytes isolated from WT mice were heavily infected in vitro by VACV and released infectious particles into the supernatant (Fig. S1).

Five dpi, WT mice showed leukocyte infiltration within the liver and mild signs of steatosis (Fig. 3A and S2A).

In contrast, infected IFNAR−/− mice displayed strong leukocyte infiltration that was associated with loss of cellular integrity, endothelium disruption, and formation of inflammatory foci (Fig. 3A and S2A).

Additionally, caspase-3 expression and the pro-inflammatory myeloid cell mediator iNOS were enhanced within inflammatory foci in the liver of IFNAR−/−, but not WT mice (Fig. 3A, B and S2B–D).

These data indicate that upon VACV infection local IFNAR triggering contributes to the control of infection, modulates inflammation, and prevents acute liver failure.

PARAGRAPH

Next, we determined whether upon VACV infection IFNAR triggering affected the composition and function of local myeloid cell subsets within the liver.

In flow-cytometric analysis of liver-derived CD11b+ mononuclear cells, numbers of infiltrating CD11c+I-A/I-E− MoMF and CD11c+I-A/I-E+ DC were significantly enhanced in WT mice at 2 and 4 dpi, when compared with uninfected controls (Fig. 4A, B).

In contrast, numbers of F4/80hiCD11b+ KC were significantly reduced at 2 dpi, whereas by 4 dpi the KC pool was replenished (Fig. 4A, B).

Of note, replenished F4/80+ KC also expressed the specific KC marker CLEC4F (Fig. S3).42

Infected IFNAR−/− mice showed a similar increase of DC compared with WT mice, whereas in contrast to WT, MoMF were not dramatically enhanced (Fig. 4A, B).

Furthermore, IFNAR−/− mice also showed significantly decreased KC numbers 2 dpi, whereas 4 dpi KC replenishment was severely impaired (Fig. 4A, B).

Similarly, in immunohistological analysis, 2 dpi KC numbers were strongly decreased in WT and IFNAR−/− mice and reappeared 4 dpi only in WT mice, but not in IFNAR−/− mice (Fig. 4C, D).

Thus, despite VACV readily infects hepatocytes, liver inflammation leads to a complete loss of KC, which are replenished in WT, but not IFNAR−/− mice.

In infected WT mice, replenished KC showed unaffected iNOS (M1-like) and YM-1 (M2-like) expression, whereas Arg-1 (M2-like) expression was reduced (Fig. S4A).

In infected IFNAR−/− mice, KC showed enhanced iNOS as well as YM-1 expression, and Arg-1 expression was unaffected (Fig. S4A).

Thus, KC from infected IFNAR−/− mice show reduced replenishment and a combined M1 and M2 phenotype.

PARAGRAPH

To specify liver-resident cell subsets that modulated viral hepatitis upon IFNAR triggering, we analyzed mice with a selective IFNAR deletion on hepatocytes (Alb-Cre+/−IFNARfl/fl) or myeloid cells, including KC (LysM-Cre+/−IFNARfl/fl).43

Although VACV readily infected hepatocytes (see Fig. 2E and Fig. S1), VACV-infected Alb-Cre+/−IFNARfl/fl mice developed only mild liver inflammation similar to that observed in WT mice (Fig. 5A–C and S2A, C).

In contrast, LysM-Cre+/−IFNARfl/fl mice developed hepatitis, as indicated by increased leukocyte infiltration and caspase-3 immunolabeling in histology (Fig. 5A, B and S2A–C), as well as elevated ALT and AST serum levels (Fig. 5C).

Of note, in VACV-infected LysM-Cre+/−IFNARfl/fl mice viral titers were elevated at 1 and 2 dpi, and were comparable with those of IFNAR−/− mice, before they decreased by 4 dpi to similar levels as detected in WT mice (Fig. S5).

These results indicated that IFNAR triggering of local KC was needed for early control of viral infection.

However, flow-cytometric analysis demonstrated that KC replenishment was normal in Alb-Cre+/−IFNARfl/fl and LysM-Cre+/−IFNARfl/fl mice (Fig. 5D/E).

KC sorted from uninfected and infected mice revealed that in LysM-Cre+/−IFNARfl/fl mice KC showed a very similar M1/M2 marker gene expression profile as observed in WT mice (Fig. S4A).

Hence, modulation of viral hepatitis is independent of IFNAR triggering of hepatocytes, while IFNAR triggering of myeloid cells, including KC, plays a critical role.

In contrast, KC replenishment is not promoted by direct IFNAR triggering of hepatocytes or KC.

Importantly, LysM-Cre+/−IFNARfl/fl mice showed only partial IFNAR-depletion of CD115+Ly6C+ blood monocytes (Fig. 5F, G).

This could explain why in LysM-Cre+/−IFNARfl/fl mice, MoKC replenishment was similar to that observed in WT mice.

PARAGRAPH

KC replenishment might be conferred either by locally proliferating KC precursors or by infiltrating monocytes.

The immunohistological analysis of liver 5 dpi of WT and IFNAR−/− mice revealed that F4/80+ cells neither showed a KC-typical spindle-like morphology nor strong F4/80 expression.

Rather, they had a round appearance and were weakly F4/80+, implying that they represented a cell subset other than KC (Fig. S6A).

Indeed, 4 dpi of WT mice MoMF, DC, and KC showed a significantly increased expression of the monocyte marker Ly6C (Fig. S6B/C).

To further resolve the origin of replenished KC, Cx3cr1+/gfp mice expressing green fluorescence protein (GFP) in monocytes, but not in KC, were VACV-infected.6

Interestingly, the restored KC pool showed significantly enhanced GFP expression, whereas MoMF and DC showed unchanged GFP expression (Fig. 6A, B).

Cell proliferation could not be detected in replenished KC, as indicated by the absence of Ki67 staining (data not shown).

These data support the hypothesis that while KC are depleted upon viral infection, Ly6C+ inflammatory monocytes infiltrate the liver and differentiate to MoMF, DC, and monocyte-derived KC (MoKC).

PARAGRAPH

To investigate the role of direct IFNAR triggering of blood monocytes for MoKC replenishment under conditions of controlled VACV infection (Fig. S7A), mixed BM chimeric mice were studied.

Similar percentages of WT and IFNAR−/− MoMF were detected in the liver of mixed BM chimeric mice 4 dpi, while the percentage of IFNAR−/− DC was enhanced (Fig. 6C/D).

Most interestingly, before the infection, chimeric mice showed a similar abundance of WT and IFNAR−/− MoKC, whereas after infection IFNAR−/− MoKC were significantly increased (Fig. 6C/D).

Of note, similar percentages of IFNAR−/− and WT blood monocytes were detected in uninfected as well as infected mixed BM chimeric mice (Fig. 6E).

These data indicate that IFNAR-ablation on liver infiltrating blood monocytes promotes their differentiation to MoKC.

Interestingly, in infected mixed BM chimeric mice the imbalance of WT and IFNAR−/− MoKC was still detectable on 8 dpi, whereas it reversed after 14 dpi (Fig. 6F).

Thus, the preferred formation of IFNAR−/− MoKC was a transient effect and we hypothesized that it was conferred by direct IFNAR triggering of infiltrating monocytes.

To test this, we performed long-term kinetics of hepatic IFNAR triggering by analyzing VACV-infected Mx2-luc mice.

Indeed, luciferase expression that reported on IFNAR triggering was detected at 2, 4, and 8 dpi, whereas at later time points it decreased to background levels (Fig. S7B).

Thus, MoKC development was impaired by direct IFNAR triggering of developing MoKC.

Additionally, in infected MxCre+/−Rosa26YFPST/ST mice, MoKC showed YFP expression at 4 dpi, supporting the hypothesis that developing MoKC were directly triggered by local IFN-I expression (Fig. S7C, D).

PARAGRAPH

To address whether local IFN-I responses modulated MoKC replenishment in other viral infections, we performed infection studies with murine cytomegalovirus (MCMV).

Despite MCMV encoding IFN-I evasion factors such as m27, the virus still induces IFN-I responses44,45 and readily infects hepatocytes.29

After MCMV infection, KC numbers significantly decreased in the liver (Fig. S8A, B), as similarly detected after VACV infection.

Upon MCMV infection of mixed BM chimeric mice, the ratio of WT and IFNAR−/− MoMF and DC was not affected, as indicated by similar percentages of WT and IFNAR−/− cells (Fig. 6G).

Nevertheless, numbers of IFNAR−/− MoKC were dramatically increased compared with WT MoKC.

As similarly observed upon VACV infection, following MCMV infection, similar percentages of IFNAR−/− and WT monocytes were detected in the blood (Fig. 6H).

Thus, during MCMV-induced acute hepatitis, direct IFNAR triggering of liver infiltrating blood monocytes inhibits their differentiation to MoKC.

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

Although serum IFN-I responses are sequestered by virus-encoded evasion proteins after VACV infection of mice,26,30 herein, we found that local IFN-I responses were still induced within secondary lymphoid organs and the liver.

The hepatic IFN-I was biologically active and essential to reduce viral replication and to modulate the inflammatory response.

While IFNAR triggering of hepatocytes was dispensable for modulation of liver inflammation, IFNAR triggering of myeloid cells was of key relevance.

Specifically, IFNAR triggering of liver-resident macrophages was essential to control viral replication, while IFNAR triggering of infiltrating monocytes delayed MoKC development.

Similar results were obtained after MCMV infection.

Thus, in acute viral hepatitis, local IFNAR triggering of myeloid cells balances anti-viral immunity and immunopathology.

PARAGRAPH

Many viruses modulate IFN-I function.18

VACV and CMV encode several factors that sequester IFN-I expression or IFNAR triggering.27,46

In particular, the VACV-encoded soluble factor B18 inhibits IFNAR triggering of cells in vitro and in vivo.25,26

Herein, we showed that upon VACV infection IFN-β expression was locally induced, and that IFN-I was biologically active mainly within the liver.

Direct IFNAR triggering of hepatocytes has been suggested to play a key role in inducing immunopathology in the liver of LCMV-infected mice.23

This is in contrast to our data, which show that IFNAR triggering of hepatocytes had no detrimental effect on hepatocytes during VACV infection, although these cells were readily VACV infected.

The anti-viral function of local IFN-I that was conferred by IFNAR triggering of KC was highlighted by VACV infection experiments with LysMCre+/−IFNARfl/fl mice, which showed elevated viral titers 1 and 2 dpi, before the infection was controlled on day four.

Additionally, LysMCre+/−IFNARfl/fl mice showed enhanced apoptosis and ALT levels compared with WT mice, indicating increased early viral replication in the absence of KC-specific IFNAR triggering.

PARAGRAPH

Interestingly, two days after VACV infection the liver showed a severe KC loss, as indicated by the complete absence of F4/80 and CLEC4F positive cells.

KC were subsequently replenished in WT, but not in IFNAR−/− mice.

Importantly, after MCMV infection a similar KC loss was detected, which implied that KC loss during viral hepatitis is a rather common phenomenon upon infection with DNA-encoded viruses.

This notion is of particular relevance because human CMV is a major cause of acute lethal hepatitis in immune-competent and immune-compromised patients.5,47

PARAGRAPH

KC replenishment was primarily conferred by differentiation of blood-derived CX3CR1+ monocytes to KC (MoKC).

In line with this, previous studies showed that upon bacterial infection KC undergo rapid IFNAR-dependent necroptosis.48

Wherein, KC loss was followed by monocyte influx, leading to anti-microbial inflammation as well as anti-inflammatory tissue repair.

As previously detected in other settings,16 in VACV-infected IFNAR−/− mice, KC showed simultaneous upregulation of M1 and M2 genes, presumably due to concurrent signals deriving from inflammation and organ pathology.

PARAGRAPH

While IFNAR−/− mice showed impaired KC replenishment, mice with a conditional myeloid cell-specific IFNAR-deletion showed KC replenishment comparable with that of WT mice.

This difference might be due to the deregulated cytokine milieu and massively enhanced viral loads in IFNAR−/− mice.

Therefore, we addressed whether direct IFNAR triggering was needed for KC replenishment under conditions of controlled viral replication, i.e., in mixed BM chimeric mice.

Surprisingly, in such mice, IFNAR-deficient monocytes differentiated even more efficiently to MoKC than IFNAR-competent ones.

This phenomenon is in accordance with the hypothesis of Guilliams and Scott,49 that only the most competitive progenitors can access the available niche at a certain time point.

Interestingly, the imbalance of IFNAR-competent and -deficient MoKC was reversed by day 14.

The presence of local IFN-I expression correlated directly with the imbalance of WT and IFNAR−/− MoKC, which implies that niche occupation is influenced by local IFNAR triggering and can be reverted after resolution of an infection.

In accordance with this, immunohistology revealed that VACV-infected LysM-Cre+/−IFNARfl/fl mice showed increased F4/80 immunolabeling when compared with WT and IFNAR−/− mice.

This could be due to the partial IFNAR-deletion on monocytes in LysM-Cre+/−IFNARfl/fl mice, which might even lead to enhanced MoKC reconstitution.

IFNAR-competent and -deficient monocytes sorted from infected mixed BM chimeric mice 2 dpi showed similar iNOS, Arg-1, and YM-1 gene expression (Fig. S4B).

Therefore, direct IFNAR triggering of infiltrating myeloid cells or MoKC does not affect the determination of a pro- or anti-inflammatory phenotype of MoKC.

PARAGRAPH

In the pathogenesis of hepatitis the beneficial or detrimental role of hepatic IFNAR triggering is discussed controversially: In poly(I:C)-induced hepatitis, myeloid-derived suppressor cells are recruited in an IFNAR-dependent manner to mount anti-inflammatory IL-1RA responses.22

Furthermore, IFNAR triggering is essential to mediate efficient CMV clearance by IFNAR-dependent CCL-2 induction, macrophage recruitment, and NK-cell activation.21

In contrast, upon LCMV infection of STAT-1 deficient mice, IFN-I induces lethal immunopathology24 and oxidative damage of hepatocytes.23

However, other studies showed that after LCMV infection, KC are necessary to prevent liver pathology in an IFNAR-dependent manner.13

Our data clearly indicate a protective and immunomodulatory role of local IFN-I responses within the liver during acute viral hepatitis.

PARAGRAPH

Herein, we showed that IFNAR triggering directly delays MoKC differentiation, but does not influence the fate of the resulting MoKC.

Since it was shown previously that after induction of liver damage M2-like macrophages are recruited to promote organ reconstitution,16 in acute hepatitis the development of MoKC with an M2-like phenotype might be advantageous for liver restoration.

Thus, it is important to better understand the balance between pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory signaling of liver-resident KC and liver-infiltrating MoMF as a basis for the development of new therapeutic strategies for acute viral hepatitis.

SECTION

Financial support

PARAGRAPH

This study was supported by the Helmholtz-Alberta Initiative, Infectious Diseases Research (HAI-IDR SO-073) to U.K., the Helmholtz Zukunftsthema Immunology & Inflammation to M.H. and U.K., the International Training Group IRTG 1273 funded by the German Research Foundation (DFG) to K.B., an ERC Consolidator Grant (HepatoMetabolPath) to M.H., and the SFB 854 to U.K.

SECTION

Conflict of interest

PARAGRAPH

The authors declare no financial conflict of interest.

PARAGRAPH

Please refer to the accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.

SECTION

Authors’ contributions

PARAGRAPH

K.B. and T.F. designed, performed and analyzed all experiments and wrote the manuscript.

J.S., P.-K.T., C.C., J.S., L.G., and S.N. performed experiments, S.L. and M.K. provided IFN-βWT/Δβ-luc mice and Mx2-luc mice, M.H. designed histology experiments, G.S. provided VACV, U.K. designed and supervised the study, wrote the manuscript and organized funding of the project.