10.1016/j.jasrep.2018.09.025

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Communities of weavers: A methodology for analyzing textile and cloth production

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Craft production broadly entails the transformation of raw materials into finished products.

Several anthropological studies on technology describe production as a social process mediated by communities and individuals (Dobres, 2000; Lemonnier, 1986, 1992, 2013).

Through this process and the identities of the individuals who made them, products acquire value, meaning, and power (Clark and Parry, 1990; Costin, 1998a, b, 2001, p. 274; Lechtman, 1993).

Scholars draw attention to the body as a medium through which techniques are learned, transmitted, and employed, and assert that these activities occur in social environments that integrate people, relationships, and material culture (Budden and Sofaer, 2009; Dobres, 2000, pp. 131, 137; Mauss, 2006).

Embodied techniques and motor skills can leave physical traces on finished products, and they can reveal social norms because they are frequently learned through imitation and repetition in social contexts (Minar, 2001; Tiballi, 2010, p. 146).

Methodologies derived from the concept of chaîne opératoire, translated as “chain of operations,” consider traces left by embodied techniques to model sequences of actions and decisions that characterize the life history of an artifact (Lemonnier, 1986, 1992, 2013; Leroi-Gourhan, 1943; Mauss, 2006).

Different sequences of production can foster variations in the material record, variations that may connect to style (Carr, 1995; Conkey and Hastorf, 1990; Sackett, 1977, 1982, 1990; Wiessner, 1983, 1984; Wobst, 1977), group identity (Brumfiel, 1998; Costin, 1998a, 1998b), individual experimentation and personal preference, and cultural and community-based norms and preferences (Dobres, 2000; Peters, 2014; Tiballi, 2010).

PARAGRAPH

Two considerations emerge from these theoretical and methodological frameworks that are of relevance to this paper.

First, if techniques and other forms of non-discursive knowledge (Budden and Sofaer, 2009, p. 203) related to the production of an artifact were learned and transmitted in social contexts and potentially across generations, then it is likely that these activities generated technical preferences among those engaged in their manufacture.

These preferences may materialize as consistency in technical attributes associated with different steps in the production process (Peters, 2014, p. 113).

Second, if materials were used that require multiple phases of manufacturing—necessitating distinct techniques—it is possible that different communities participated in their production.

Therefore, we propose that materials with apparent, consistent techniques across multiple phases of production correspond to preferences that marked distinct communities of weavers.

We apply this model to an assemblage of well-preserved Andean textiles to gain insights into the communities involved in their production.

PARAGRAPH

Textiles are ideal materials for this study.

As structurally complex materials, they retain physical traces of a multi-stage production process described by Peters (2014, p. 111) as “agglutinative.”

Textile production broadly consists of several phases: 1) harvesting and processing cotton or camelid hair fibers, 2) spinning these fibers and plying them into yarns, 3) dyeing or not dyeing these yarns, and then 4) manipulating yarns through weaving or non-weaving techniques (e.g., looping, braiding, etc.) to produce textiles, which can be further modified through painting, embroidery, or attachment to other textiles.

Close examination of various features in a single finished textile such as spin direction, ply, dye, and weave structure, can determine the techniques used by weavers throughout the production process.

Given the multiple choices available to weavers during each phase, such as spinning a fiber in either the S direction or the Z direction, textiles from a given archaeological context that display shared techniques demonstrate consistency and preference in the production process.

We define such groups of textiles as “style groups,” following Peters (2014), which may reflect communities of weavers.

We also follow Sackett's (1982, p. 63) broad definition of style as a “highly specific and characteristic way of doing something which by its very nature is peculiar to a time and space.”

Ethnographic and archaeological research suggest that weavers within the Andes learned and transmitted technical knowledge in group environments which in turn, created preferences in textile production practices that distinguished communities and cultures and expressed group identity (Bird, 1979; Brezine, 2013, p. 240; Franquemont, 1986; Hendon, 2006; Medlin, 1986; Rowe, 1998, p. 22; Splitstoser, 2009; Wallace, 1979).

PARAGRAPH

Here, we analyze 141 textiles found in a single grave located in the mid-Chincha Valley, Peru (Fig. 1) that dates from the Late Horizon (1400–1532 CE) to the Colonial Period (1532–1825 CE).1

We document the techniques used in two major phases of textile production: 1) yarn processing (spinning and plying) and 2) weaving.

Dye was neither included as a production step nor was it incorporated into our analyses because we considered the number of dyed textiles too small (15).

Fiber was also not included as a production step because only a small sample of textiles has supplementary warps or wefts of camelid fiber (11).

We develop a manual hierarchical classification method informed by theoretical and methodological approaches to technology and production and archaeological and ethnographic literature on textiles.

This method is used to identify style groups based on consistent associations of techniques employed in these two phases of production.

Six style groups that account for 71% of the entire textile assemblage are identified.

We then conduct exploratory analyses of our textile assemblage using several methods.

We use the Inverse Simpson index and a Dunnett's modified Tukey-Kramer pairwise multiple comparison test to compare style groups in terms of textile features such as thread count, dimensions, garment type, and design.

Lastly, a Dice-Sørenson distance measure is used as the basis for an independent hierarchical classification method for identifying style groups.

We compare the results of this cluster analysis with that of our previously described manual classification method and find that they mostly coincide with each other.

We suggest that these style groups may indicate the presence of multiple communities that produced textiles found in this grave.

SECTION

Background

SECTION

Textile production in the Andes: ethnographic, archaeological, and documentary perspectives

PARAGRAPH

The ethnographic literature on Andean textiles demonstrates community-based preferences in spinning, such as papers in Rowe (1998) which examine spinning and weaving practices found among highland communities in Ecuador.

Meisch (1998, pp. 22–23) notes that conventions in spinning practices are community-based, observing that among the Saraguro community, S-spun yarn is considered “normal” and Z-spun yarn is considered the “reverse.”

Among the camelid herding communities situated in Isluga (northern Chile), Dransart (2002) documents types of yarn that are spun and plied in normative ways for the production of specific textiles.

For example, yarns known as ch'anka, composed of two Z-spun fibers plied in the S direction, are used to produce carrying cloths, blankets, and bags, while ch'añu yarns encompass differently colored and plied fibers used in the production of storage sacks (Dransart, 2002, pp. 114–115).

Franquemont's (1986) work on textile production in the Cusco region further supports the claim that preferences in spinning can be tied to specific communities, demonstrating that Z-spun yarn is the predominant yarn type for communities in the area.

PARAGRAPH

The ethnographic record in the Andes also suggests that preferences in spinning and weaving are learned and ingrained during early childhood and oftentimes within communal environments, and that they can be related to group identity.

To be clear, the textile production process requires non-discursive knowledge and motor skills learned through focused attention, conscious movement, imitation, repetition, and experimentation (Minar, 2001; Tiballi, 2010, p. 146).

Once mastered, these skills are very difficult to change, and for this reason, they can materialize as preferences in textile production techniques.

Since spinning in Andean weaving communities is an important daily activity frequently conducted alongside other tasks, children oftentimes learn this activity as early as age four and develop proficiency in it by age nine (Bolin, 2006; Rowe, 1998, p. 24).

In the Chillihuani community based in the south-central Andean highlands, Bolin (2006, p. 99) finds that children learn how to spin and weave by directly imitating, as opposed to being instructed by, other family members who have mastered these activities.

Dransart (2002, p. 123) describes a public, communal environment in which members of younger and older generations weave textiles together, allowing for critique, competition, and dialogue to foster and help determine acceptable practices.

For instance, Dransart (2002, p. 123) writes that older women during the 1980's criticized younger women for the amount of dyed color they used.

In addition, for many young women in the Calcha community in Bolivia, learning to weave—commonly from their mothers within households—allows them to produce textiles according to acceptable standards and express their affiliation to the Calcha (Medlin, 1986, p. 276).

In this case, producing textiles in conventional, socially mediated ways helps structure group identity.

PARAGRAPH

Preferences and diversity in textile production techniques have also been documented in the archaeological record of the Andes.

Bird (1979) discusses the conservative nature of spinning in Peru, suggesting a preference for Z-spun yarns on the southern coast and S-spun yarns on the northern coast.

Scholars have demonstrated additional evidence for this argument, even among modern populations, and debated the reasons behind these patterns (Conklin, 1975, 1979; Franquemont et al., 1992; Goodell, 1968; Rowe and Cohen, 2002, p. 84; Splitstoser, 2009; Wallace, 1979).

Wallace (1979) finds broad support for these allegedly regionally-based spinning traditions, yet notes examples of interregional variation.

For instance, many central coast plain-weave textiles feature Z-spun cotton yarns, but earlier twined textiles exhibit yarns spun in the S and Z directions (Wallace, 1979, p. 32).

Splitstoser's (2009) analysis of Paracas textiles from the site of Cerillos on the Peruvian southern coast illustrates a strong preference for cotton yarns spun in the Z direction and plied in the S direction, “rules” governing the inclusion of specific colors and fiber types, and a wide variation in color combination and weave structure.

He argues that weavers affiliated with Cerillos followed guidelines regarding textile production and design, yet also experimented.

Peters (2014) performed another analysis of Paracas textiles to identify the nature of the communities who participated in textile production.

Based on the diversity and consistency of styles and iconography, Peters (2014, pp. 136–137) argues for the presence of numerous communities of textile production that competed in “quality, esoteric knowledge, and innovation.”

Her study illustrates a broad principle for analyses of artifacts that this paper draws from: “co-variation among several practices in producing a series of artifacts may be considered evidence of a shared community of textile production, a social entity that shared norms and habits” (Peters, 2014, p. 136).

PARAGRAPH

Regarding Late Horizon textiles, Tiballi (2010) adopts a chaîne opératoire methodology to examine variation in production techniques within a textile assemblage from the Cemetery of the Sacrificed Women at Pachacamac.

This assemblage was likely associated with the acllas, a specialized class of female weavers controlled by the Inca state.

She finds a predominant preference for Z-spun yarn and documents that all yarns found on spindles in the cemetery are also spun in the Z direction (Tiballi, 2010, p. 363).

Based on these results, Tiballi (2010, p. 363) argues that spinning yarns in the Z direction was the local, conventional spinning practice for the acllas.

Predominant textile production practices documented in these archaeological cases were likely related to cultural or community-based preferences, following ethnographic sources.

PARAGRAPH

Written sources demonstrate that different Andean textile styles communicated status and cultural affiliations to provinces, nations, and social groups in areas integrated into the Inca Empire (de Betanzos, 1996[1551]; Cobo, 1979[1653]; Julien, 1983).

We consider Andean textiles and their production techniques and styles as important material markers that distinguished cultural groups and communities (Boytner, 2004; Murra, 1962; Phipps, 2013; Reycraft, 2005; Rowe and O'Neill, 1984).

During the fifteenth century, the Inca incorporated a diverse array of polities with varying levels of political complexity.

For example, the Inca required conquered populations to maintain their distinct local variations in textiles (Cobo, 1979[1653]; Julien, 1983) as a way of discouraging alliance-building and deterring rebellions (Costin, 1998b, p. 123).

While commoners were forbidden to wear elite textiles under Inca rule, local elites were given Inca-style textile gifts as part of their incorporation into the administrative hierarchy (de Betanzos, 1996[1551]).

PARAGRAPH

During this time, even though textile production was geared toward domestic and political economies and involved several categories of participants, it was strongly connected to women (Costin, 1995; Gero, 1992; Moseley, 1992).

Younger children herded camelids and collected flowers and herbs for dyes, and adult men and women processed cotton fiber, spun threads, and wove (Costin, 1998b, p. 129).

Both men and women participated in the production of rough, plain cloth (awasqa) and finely made cloth (qompi).

Eight of the ten census categories for women ranging from ages five to eighty fulfilled tasks relating to textile production under the Inca administration (Guamán Poma de Ayala, 1980[1615], pp. 190–209).

Commoner women produced awasqa for their households and communities as well as tribute for state institutions (Costin, 1998b, p. 129).

Elite women made qompi for religious, political, and military institutions and oftentimes directly for Inca ruling elites (Costin, 1998b, p. 129).

PARAGRAPH

Textiles also played key roles in mortuary practices, which encompass grave construction, interactions with the deceased, and the deposition of grave inclusions.

Through these practices, groups expressed and negotiated cultural affiliations as well as social and political relationships among the living and the deceased (Brown, 2008; Fitzsimmons and Shimada, 2011; Quinn, 2015; Shimada and Fitzsimmons, 2015; Velasco, 2016; Verdery, 1999).

In Andean mortuary contexts, textiles are abundantly present because they were commonly used as wrappings for, and offerings to, the deceased.

As attire for both the living and the deceased, Andean textiles were—and are— important visual expressions of cultural distinctions (Boytner, 2004; Murra, 1962; Phipps, 2013; Reycraft, 2005; Rowe and O'Neill, 1984).

SECTION

Historical background of the Chincha Valley

PARAGRAPH

The Chincha Kingdom was one of the most complex, centralized states on the Peruvian southern coast, controlling the Chincha Valley during the Late Intermediate Period, or LIP (1000–1400 CE) (Canziani, 2009; Menzel and Rowe, 1966; Sandweiss, 1992; Sandweiss and Reid, 2015).

The Chincha network was thought to be organized into resource-holding groups led by chiefs, based on a Spanish document concerned with the Chincha known as the “Relación” (Crespo, 1975).

The Chincha derived their wealth from silver, gold, and possibly guano (Curátola, 1997).

Chincha merchants reportedly engaged in overseas and overland trade, obtaining camelids from Cuzco, metals from the Titicaca basin, and spondylus (Spondylus princeps) shell from Ecuador (Sandweiss and Reid, 2015).

Sandweiss and Reid (2015), however, find limited evidence of spondylus dating to before the Late Horizon, suggesting that Chincha gained access to the spondylus trade and expanded their mercantile enterprises after, and possibly because of, the Inca conquest.

PARAGRAPH

The Inca “peacefully” conquered and colonized the Chincha Kingdom during the Late Horizon, reorganizing local economic, social, and political structures.

They placed agricultural land under state control, organized the Chincha population into administrative units, relocated Chincha silversmiths away from the valley, and subjected the Chincha to mit'a (public service) demands (Sandweiss and Reid, 2015, p. 9).

Sandweiss's (1992) excavations of the Late Horizon fishing settlement of Lo Demás in the lower Chincha Valley found that the Inca restructured the local coastal economy to intensify specialized fishing production.

Sandweiss and Reid (2015) argue that the Chincha negotiated with the Inca to become a merchant-based client state with privileged access to the spondylus trade franchise in exchange for voluntary subjugation.

A “dual rule” political system provided local elites with considerable autonomy and leadership roles alongside Inca administrators and maintained preexisting hierarchies (Sandweiss and Reid, 2015).

SECTION

Mortuary context and research goals

SECTION

Mortuary context

PARAGRAPH

In 2014, we collected surface material from a grave known as UC-008 Tomb 1 (Fig. 2), located within a cemetery known as UC-008 (Fig. 3).

The grave (3.09 × 2.35 m) appears to be subterranean, partly constructed of local fieldstones and comprising a northern-facing opening and depositions of multiple individuals including adults, sub-adults, males, and females.

During surface collection, we found a total of 470 whole and fragmented textiles which were subsampled for our study.

Some textiles contained juvenile remains and exhibited stains, suggesting that they were used to wrap the deceased.

Four radiocarbon dates (Table 1) from two reeds and two vertebrae associated with those reeds indicate a time span of use from the Late Horizon to the Colonial Period.

PARAGRAPH

This grave bears resemblance to a chullpa, an above-ground or subterranean grave type found throughout the central Andes.

Archaeological research focusing on chullpas suggest that they flourished during the LIP and continued to be built and used during the Late Horizon as Inca hegemony spread across the Andes (Nielsen, 2016; Stanish, 2012; Tantaleán, 2006).

During these periods, kin-based, resource-holding groups traced their affiliation by reference to focal, mummified ancestors, typically housed in chullpas located in highly visible, fixed locations (Bongers et al., 2012; Dillehay, 1995; Isbell, 1997; Mantha, 2009).

Members of these communities negotiated their affiliations and political relationships by venerating deceased ancestors from chullpas (Dillehay, 1995; Isbell, 1997; Nielsen, 2008).

SECTION

Research goals

PARAGRAPH

We analyzed the textiles while keeping in mind that this assemblage derived from a single grave and adopted the view that style groups encompass textiles with consistent associations among techniques across the production process (Peters, 2014, p. 113).

First, we sought to identify how varied and consistent a given assemblage of textiles is in terms of their production techniques and then bracketed these textiles into style groups.

We did not assign regional affiliations to textiles a priori based on preferences in individual techniques because Andean textiles exhibit considerable diversity in production and design and were “rarely uniform” (Boytner, 2004, p. 136).

Preferences in individual textile production techniques like spinning neither necessarily indicate that the entire textile production process was conducted or supervised by a single community of weavers (Tiballi, 2010, p. 437), nor do they necessarily reveal the regional affiliation of the weavers.

That being said, we argue that consistency in multiple techniques associated with distinct stages in the textile production process provides stronger evidence for communities of weavers (Peters, 2014, p. 113), and we sought to develop a methodology that can identify this kind of consistency.

PARAGRAPH

Second, we conducted descriptive statistical analyses of the textile assemblage that provides an overview of observable patterns in dimensions, warp and weft counts, garment type, and design motifs.

Variations in these specific textile attributes can carry implications for understanding specialization in the production of garments of a particular type and size (garment type, dimensions), variation in cloth quality (warp count and weft count) (Gleba, 2017, p. 1207), and access to symbols (design motifs) that may have been “emblemic” (Wiessner, 1983) and thus associated with group identity.

Many studies have explored the relationship between design motifs on textiles and group identity (Boytner, 1998; Cassman, 1997; Franquemont, 1986; Rodman, 1992; Zorn, 1990).

PARAGRAPH

Lastly, we compared patterns in yarn production and weaving within our assemblage with that of other textile assemblages analyzed in the Chincha Valley.

We performed this comparison to develop understandings of underexplored Chincha cultural practices and modes of differentiation.

PARAGRAPH

This paper addresses the following research question: to what extent does a textile assemblage from a single grave exhibit similar production processes?

This question is derived from the ethnographic and archaeological literature on Andean textiles discussed above.

These sources demonstrate that local communities of weavers oftentimes learned and used textile production techniques in social contexts and in the process, developed preferences in yarn production and weaving.

Rowe (2014, p. 159) summarizes this point.

She notes that technical features of textiles (e.g., spin direction, ply, weave structure) can serve as reliable indicators of local communities of textile production because they are usually “passed down from parent to child and repeated as a matter of course,” making it more difficult for these features to be copied outside local areas.

Preferences or similarities in these technical features can “result from the desire to conform to local norms or to new and prestigious forms, or sometimes by fiat from the state” (Rowe, 2014, p. 159).

SECTION

Methods and materials

SECTION

Sampling methods and documenting textile attributes

PARAGRAPH

Patterned and plain textiles were recovered from UC-008 Tomb 1.

We consider these to be distinct types of textiles based on the varying amounts of labor required to produce them.

Of the 470 textiles recovered, 121 were patterned and 349 were plain.

These were placed in separate sample bags.

A total of 141 textiles (30% of the entire assemblage) were randomly sampled, yielding 105 plain and 36 patterned textiles.

PARAGRAPH

To analyze the textiles, we followed a step-wise procedure: first, examining the overall structure of the textile; then, studying the structure of the yarns used to make the textile; and finally, identifying the fiber used to make each type of yarn (warp, weft, and any supplemental yarn) (Ballard and Skals, 1996; Good, 2001; Goodway, 1987; Jakes, 2000; King, 1978; Walton and Eastwood, 1988).

PARAGRAPH

Accordingly, the descriptive features of the textiles were examined following Strand et al. (2010).

The dimensions, shape, possible type, and color of each textile were recorded first.

If either the warp or the weft selvage was incomplete, classifying the type and shape posed difficulties.

If enough of the textile remained to allow for a hypothetical reconstruction, then an educated guess as to the shape and type was made.

If no complete selvage was present, we recorded the type and shape as unknown.

The best approximation of color was recorded, although it is possible that many of the colors had faded considerably due to prolonged exposure to the elements.

Other features were also recorded, such as the presence or absence of heading cords, and the type of joining stitches found on some of the textiles that were composed of multiple webs.

PARAGRAPH

Following this, we examined the weave structure of each textile under a binocular stereomicroscope at various magnifications (from 10 to 30×) depending on the fineness of the weave.

From this examination, spin and ply were recorded for all yarns in the textile, including any colored or supplemental yarns.

Classification following Emery (1966) was observed, with a 2-ply, S-spun, Z-plied textile recorded as “Z2S.”

The term “single-ply” is used here for clarity to describe single yarns considering the large number of paired warp textiles encountered (Splitstoser, 2012, p. 3).

A linen tester at 5× magnification was used on a sufficiently preserved section of the textile to measure thread count per inch.

To maintain consistency, warp and weft counts, length, and width were recorded in inches.

PARAGRAPH

Finally, fiber identification was performed using polarized light microscopy at 100× – 200× magnification.

We followed the method outlined by Jakes (2000): that is, two fibers in different locations in the warp direction of the main yarn, two fibers from the weft direction of the main yarn, and two fibers from each of any other yarns used (for example supplementary weft yarns, colored yarns along the warp selvages, or construction stitching yarns) were extracted using a pair of tweezers and the attachment clipped with a pair of scissors.

Each fiber was placed on a slide and a drop of water was wicked in underneath a cover slip to act as a temporary mounting medium.

The fibers were examined under plane polarized and cross polarized light.

Only two types of fibers were found to be used in the textiles: cotton and camelid hair.

All attributes were recorded in a spreadsheet (O'Shea and Bongers, 2018a).

SECTION

Manual hierarchical classification method

PARAGRAPH

Our manual hierarchical classification method, conducted in the R programming platform (R Core Team, 2015), generated sub-groups of textiles with techniques associated with single or multiple production steps (i.e. “spin sub-group,” “spin-ply sub-group,” and “spin-ply-weave sub-groups,” described below).

Sub-groups of textiles displaying distinct, consistent combinations of yarn production and weaving techniques are known as “textile groups.”

By way of example, we demonstrate our process for identifying the first 5 textile groups, two of which are style groups (Fig. 4).

PARAGRAPH

We first identified nine possible combinations of warp and weft spin in our assemblage and determined the counts of textiles with each of these technique combinations.

Only 7 of the 9 possible combinations are represented (Table 2).

These seven “spin sub-groups” feature distinct combinations of warp and weft spin techniques.

PARAGRAPH

Next, we chose one of these “spin sub-groups” of textiles with S-spun warps and S-spun wefts (n = 55, Fig. 4) and proceeded to identify technique combinations of warp and weft ply within this sub-group.

There are 4 possible technique combinations of warp and weft ply in this sub-group, and only 2 are represented: single-ply warps and single-ply wefts (n = 54) and 2-ply and single-ply warps and single-ply wefts (n = 1).

At this stage in our analysis, we selected 1 “spin-ply sub-group” of textiles with 1) S-spun warps and S-spun wefts and 2) single-ply warps and single-ply wefts (Fig. 4).

PARAGRAPH

Then, we examined the distribution of weave structures within this sub-group.

We denote whether warps are single or paired in our weave structure categories.

For example, “1/1 plain” refers to plain weave structures with single warps and wefts, and “2/1 plain” refers to plain weave structures with paired warps and single wefts.

“WRF” denotes warp-faced structures.

There are 5 types of weave structures: 2/1 plain (n = 31), 1/1 plain (n = 16), 2/2 plain (n = 3), 1/1 WRF plain (n = 3), and 2/1 WRF plain (n = 3) (Fig. 4).

PARAGRAPH

At this stage, we have identified five “spin-ply-weave sub-groups” with distinct combinations of techniques associated with both production phases (Fig. 4).

We consider them to be textile groups.

We applied these sub-grouping procedures to the other “spin-ply sub-group” not included in the example (S-spun warps and S-spun wefts and 2-ply and single-ply warps and single-ply wefts, n = 1) and the remaining six “spin sub-groups” of textiles.

We calculated the cumulative proportion of total textiles that were included in each one of these groups (Fig. 5) and selected a threshold of 0.71 for assigning certain textile groups as style groups.

That is, those textile groups which comprise 71% of the analyzed textiles by count are labeled style groups.

We selected this threshold because it accounts for a representative percentage of the sampled textiles.

Since the remaining textile groups have small sample sizes that are equal to or <5, we combined them into the “other textiles group” for the purposes of this paper.

Furthermore, unlike the style groups, the other textiles group contains textiles with various techniques associated with the yarn processing and weaving phases of production (Table 3).

It is treated as a discrete category, however, for comparative purposes in this paper.

SECTION

Methods for exploratory analysis

PARAGRAPH

After identifying our style groups, we employed various methods to conduct exploratory analyses of our textile assemblage.

These analyses sought to 1) compare textile dimensions and warp and weft counts, 2) evaluate the concentration of categories for garment type and design motifs within different groups of textiles, and 3) compare results of an independent hierarchical classification method for identifying style groups with that of our previously described manual hierarchical classification method.

PARAGRAPH

To compare dimensions and warp and weft counts, we performed a Dunnett's modified Tukey-Kramer pairwise multiple comparisons test, which conducts multiple pairwise t-tests for mean differences with post-hoc adjustment.

This test does not make any assumptions regarding equal population variances between groups and is not affected by unequal sample sizes (Dunnett, 1980), both of which are features of the variables chosen for analysis within this sample assemblage of textiles.

The test was conducted to assess differences in mean length (in.),

mean width (in.),

mean warp count per inch, and mean weft count per inch among style groups and between style groups and the other textiles group.

A multiple comparisons test is necessary here in order to reduce the probability of obtaining a Type I error (a false positive) due to the number of style groups being compared, where it may be possible to obtain a significant difference “by chance” when none actually exists.

PARAGRAPH

To analyze the diversity of types (e.g., garment type and design motif) within the style groups and the other textiles group, we utilized the Inverse Simpson's index, which is a measure, in part, of the variance of the abundance distribution of types (Magurran, 2004, pp. 114–115).

That is, this index incorporates the abundance within each type as well as the spread, or evenness, of that abundance across style groups (Maurer and McGill, 2011, p. 56).

The specific calculation of Simpson's index utilized here is1D=1/∑i−1Npi2.where pi is the proportion of type i and N represents the total number of style groups (Oksanen et al., 2018).

The index will increase as a particular assemblage becomes more “even” in the abundance of the different types that constitute it.

A permutation method was utilized in order to simulate ten thousand assemblages based on existing row and column totals, and the Inverse Simpson's index values from each simulated assemblage were compared to the index values from the actual assemblage to determine the (summed) probability of acquiring the observed index value (or greater) for a style group by chance.

Finally, a bootstrap, which is a resampling with replacement of the existing data in cases where the data are drawn from an unknown probability distribution, was applied to the data in order to estimate the 95% confidence intervals for the Inverse Simpson's indices derived for each of the style groups (Efron and Tibshirani, 1986; Tibshirani and Leisch, 2017).

PARAGRAPH

Moreover, we analyzed the joint co-occurrence of the aforementioned production variables (weft spin, warp spin, etc.) on the textiles using a Dice-Sørenson binary-distance matrix, and then used that distance matrix as the basis for a hierarchical clustering classification using the “average linkage” method.

The Dice-Sørenson (Dice, 1945) similarity coefficient was developed in ecology and is widely used for presence-absence data in cases where the presence of two zeros between two observations of one variable is not significant, i.e. the fact that a feature is not observed between two textiles does not mean that those two textiles are more similar as a result of this shared absence.

Nevertheless, the index does not satisfy the triangle inequality for a true metric distance, and is therefore considered “semimetric” (Legendre and Legendre, 2012, pp. 274–276).

In this case, the variables were recoded such that they were either absent or present (0/1) on each textile.

For the hierarchical cluster analysis, the average linkage method was chosen as it has been demonstrated that for clusters of unequal sample size, the average linkage and centroid may perform more consistently (Kuiper and Fisher, 1975).

The optimal number of clusters was determined by using the silhouette-width method which measures the degree of membership of each textile to its cluster based on the distance on average between this and all other clusters to which it belongs (Kaufman and Rousseeuw, 2009, pp. 83–86).

The optimal number of clusters was 29, which is nearly the total, and this is likely due to the binary nature of the recoded variables.

As a result, 15 clusters were chosen as it represents a high silhouette width value (0.75) and is the point when the average silhouette width number begins to generate incremental additions to the total (see the supporting R code).

These fifteen clusters were then compared to those style groups identified through the manual hierarchical classification method discussed earlier.

SECTION

Results

PARAGRAPH

Our methodology identified 29 sub-groups of textiles displaying distinct combinations of yarn production and weaving techniques (Table 3).

Based on the 0.71 cumulative proportion cutoff, there are six style groups in this distribution: Textile Group 1 (n = 31), 18 (n = 24), 2 (n = 16), 19 (n = 11), 7 (n = 9), and 14 (n = 9).

We have renamed them using a style group (SG) prefix: SG 1, SG 18, SG 2, SG 19, SG 7, and SG 14.

A total of 41 textiles do not fall into style groups; we placed these textiles into the other textiles group, denoted by “OT” in subsequent figures.

SECTION

Thread count and size

PARAGRAPH

We calculated warp and weft counts for all but one of the textiles in our sample (n = 140) because this single textile comprises multiple fragments with varying thread counts (Fig. 7).

SG 14 possesses the lowest median warp count value (19), and SG 2 and 19 have the lowest median weft count values (16).

OT and SG 18 have the highest median warp count (24), and SG 18 has the highest median weft count (21).

Regarding size, SG 19 displays the lowest median length value (16.44) and SG 2 has the lowest median width value (12.99).

SG 14 possesses the highest median length value (23.23) and SG 18 exhibits the highest median width value (20.38).

PARAGRAPH

As mentioned previously, we performed a Dunnett's modified Tukey-Kramer pairwise multiple comparison test to evaluate the extent to which groups did or did not differ significantly in the mean values of the selected attributes (warp count, weft count, length (in.),

width (in.)).

Although the test mitigates the probability of obtaining a “significant difference” between style groups when none exists, due to the strictness of the raised alpha level of the test, the means between groups will appear to be non-significant when the alternative may be true (Dunnett, 1980, p. 800).

In that respect, comparison of the confidence intervals between the style groups for each of these variables may give the appearance of significant differences between groups (Fig. 8).

Nevertheless, of the twenty-one pairwise comparisons between the four attributes, none of the means of each attribute between the style groups were significantly different at an alpha of 0.05, although the upper bound of the confidence interval for OT, SG 2, and SG 1 in warp count, and SG 19, SG 18, and OT in weft count, barely included zero, indicating a present but weak effect (see supporting files).

SECTION

Garment type and design

PARAGRAPH

There are four garment types: manta, tunic, “folded and sewn square textile,” loincloth, and unknown.

“Folded and sewn square textile” (F/S) refers to a distinct garment type that may be a repurposed loincloth or perhaps a head covering.

It is a long rectangle that is folded in the middle and sewn along one edge, forming a square with an opening.

There is a wide distribution of garment types in the textile groups (Table 4) (O'Shea and Bongers, 2018b).

Loincloths, mantas, and textiles of unknown garment type are found in all groups of textiles, while folded and sewn square textiles are present in all groups of textiles except SG 14 and tunics are only found in SG 1, SG 18, and OT.

PARAGRAPH

We also identified the distribution of different design motifs (Table 5) (O'Shea and Bongers, 2018c).

Six categories of motifs were defined: plain, border, border/fish motif, geometric/fish motif, geometric motif, and alternating stripes.

Textiles labeled as “plain” do not exhibit any design motifs.

“Border” refers to colored vertical stripes positioned near ends of textiles.

Textiles with “alternating stripes” feature either plaid or multiple stripe designs.

The remaining categories refer to varying combinations of geometric, fish-like, and border motifs.

SG 1, SG 18, and OT are the only groups that contain design motifs.

SG 18 contains four different types of motifs, including the following categories: border, alternating stripes, border/fish motif (see Fig. 6), and geometric motif.

SG 1 features textiles with border, alternating stripes, and geometric/fish motifs.

OT contains the most textiles with borders (15) alongside two textiles with alternating stripes and 1 textile with a border/fish motif.

PARAGRAPH

The results of the bootstrapped Inverse Simpson indices by group reveal wide-confidence intervals for each of the style groups with varying design features (design feature groups) and garment types (garment type groups) (Fig. 9).

Each style group contains relatively low Inverse Simpson's values, particularly among those in the design feature group category, indicating a high level of dominance by a particular type in each group.

For instance, SG 14 has a very low average Inverse Simpson's value among the design feature groups since it is solely composed of one design type (“plain”).

In contrast, in the garment type groups, the Inverse Simpson index values tend to be high, and the confidence intervals are correspondingly high.

This makes it difficult to determine the extent to which a style group's distribution of design features or garment types is possibly more even.

Only a couple of garment type groups have relatively tight confidence intervals and high Inverse Simpson's values (SG 1 and SG 18).

Furthermore, the permutation method revealed that among garment type groups, the observed Inverse Simpson's index value for SG 18 occurred with low probability (p = 0.0244), suggesting that SG 18 has a nonrandom and diverse assemblage of garment types.

SECTION

Comparison to the dice-based average linkage hierarchical classification model

PARAGRAPH

As described previously, the use of an independent hierarchical clustering algorithm based on the Dice-Sørenson distance measure yielded anywhere between two and thirty clusters.

The three major initial branches of the dendrogram appear to be grouped around whether the S or Z warp or weft spin is used.

For example, one of the larger groups identified (the light blue group in the right on Fig. 10) is demarcated by containing the following variables: S warp spin, S weft spin, single-ply warp, single-ply weft, and 2/1 plain.

In contrast, the leftmost branch of the dendrogram includes most of those textiles that seem to have a less typical combination of production techniques with respect to the other analyzed textiles.

The results of the cluster analysis are also largely in accord with the previous manual hierarchical classification method (Fig. 11).

The majority of those textiles that were assigned to SG 1, for instance, almost all overlapped with those identified to be part of cluster one (the light blue group in Fig. 10).

Nevertheless, there were some style groups which differed from the classification model, such as SG 14, which overlapped entirely with cluster ten, and yet which the algorithm added seven additional textiles classified as OT.

It is important to note that other distance measures and clustering algorithms (median, centroid, etc.) will yield different resolved dendrograms, even if the divergences are only minor, and therefore this analysis does not constitute an “objective” comparison, but rather a complement to the previously described process of iteratively filtering the textiles based on certain attributes.

SECTION

Comparison to Lower Chincha Valley textiles

PARAGRAPH

Data from the textile assemblage from UC-008 Tomb 1 are consistent with technical and design trends associated with lower Chincha Valley textiles.

O'Neale et al. (1949) analyzed cotton plain weave textiles recovered from Uhle's (1924) excavations of lower valley graves.

They find that most textiles in their assemblage (62 out of 112) feature paired warps and single wefts and that striping is a primary form of colored decoration (O'Neale et al., 1949).

Garaventa (1979) conducted analyses on 13 textiles found in five graves excavated by Uhle (1924).

She notes that 1) borders are frequent design motifs, 2) the most common weave structure is plain weave with paired warps, and 3) most cotton yarns are single-ply and spun in the S direction.

Fattorini (1984) analyzed 127 loose threads and 42 fragments of cloth recovered from the site of Lo Demás, excavated by Sandweiss (1992).

Fattorini's (1984) data show that all textiles are woven in the plain weave structure, and that most of these textiles exhibit paired warps and single wefts.

PARAGRAPH

Our data reveal that 1) 64% (90 out of 141) of textiles from UC-008 Tomb 1 display the plain weave structure with paired warps, 2) 63% exhibit warps and wefts spun in the S direction, and that 3) borders are found on 19 textiles, representing the most frequent design motif.

These trends are in accord with previous research performed on lower Chincha Valley textiles.

These data suggest that textile techniques and design were broadly shared across the Chincha Valley.

SECTION

Discussion and conclusion

PARAGRAPH

We developed a methodology for identifying style groups in textile assemblages, performed an exploratory analysis of textiles sampled from a single Andean grave in the mid-Chincha Valley, and compared this assemblage to other textile assemblages in the Chincha Valley.

Textile production processes are social processes where learning and use of techniques are mediated by communities and individuals within social environments.

Textiles displaying consistent combinations of techniques across the textile production process are emblematic of technological styles and specific “ways of doing” that oftentimes distinguish communities of weavers.

These notions informed our manual hierarchical classification method.

PARAGRAPH

This method was employed to filter textiles exhibiting consistent use of techniques associated with the yarn production and weaving stages of the textile production process.

Our analyses identified a total of 29 textile groups.

Among these groups, we identified six style groups that encompass 71% of our assemblage.

These results indicate an overall high degree of variation in textile production processes.

We drew upon scholarship on technology and chaîne opératoire, non-discursive knowledge, learning, and motor skills, ethnographic and archaeological studies of Andean textiles, and written accounts of textile production to fulfill our research goals and interpret our data.

Although we argue that multiple communities of weavers consistently produced most textiles in this assemblage from the Late Horizon to the Colonial Period, other models can also explain these data.

For example, we cannot rule out that a single community of weavers may have experimented with and employed various techniques to produce these different kinds of textiles.

This paper contributes to this scholarship by providing an Andean case study that demonstrates how multiple communities of weavers, perhaps even local households, may have been involved in the production of a technically varied and consistently made assemblage of textiles from a single grave.

PARAGRAPH

Our exploratory analysis offers additional tantalizing information on communities of textile production in the mid-Chincha Valley.

Results show no statistically significant differences in mean warp count, mean weft count, mean length, and mean width between the style groups and the other textiles group.

If we consider thread count as a marker of cloth quality (Gleba, 2017, p. 1207), these findings suggest minimal, if any, variations in cloth quality among communities of weavers.

The data reveal low variation in size, suggesting that communities broadly produced similarly sized textiles.

Our findings also indicate mostly broad confidence intervals of mean Inverse Simpson's values for design feature and garment type groups that can be explained by chance.

Only the wide distribution of garment types in SG 18 appears non-randomly diverse.

These data suggest that at least one community of weavers in the mid-Chincha Valley did not necessarily specialize in the production of specific garment types.

Lastly, a Dice-based average linkage hierarchical cluster analysis was used to analyze the joint co-occurrence of yarn production and weaving techniques.

This analysis produced some clusters that strongly overlap with our style groups (e.g., cluster one and SG 1), and other clusters that differ from them (e.g., cluster ten and SG 14).

This cluster analysis serves as a complement to our manual hierarchical classification method.

PARAGRAPH

Comparison between the textile assemblage from UC-008 Tomb 1 and lower Chincha Valley textiles reveals similarities in weave structure, spin direction, and the use of the border motif.

In particular, the predominance of the 2/1 plain weave structure in our sample and in lower Chincha Valley textiles is peculiar as this is commonly linked with the north coast Chimú textile style (Rowe and O'Neill, 1984, p. 24).

There are several models to explain these patterns.

Given that the 2/1 plain weave structure is documented in the lower and mid-valleys, this technique may not be connected to the Chimú textile style, but rather may be derived from a local Chincha style.

Communities in both areas may have communicated their shared affiliation to the Chincha Kingdom by producing textiles with the 2/1 plain weave structure.

The 2/1 plain weave structure may also indicate the presence of a north coast mitmaq (a group of non-local colonists).

Because the Inca resettled north coast groups in the Cañete and Ica Valleys (Marcus, 2008, p. 7; Rostworowski de Diez Canseco, 1978, p. 166), both of which border the Chincha Valley, it is possible that these groups were also resettled in Chincha or somehow made their way to Chincha.

These groups would have likely brought their local textile traditions, which probably featured the 2/1 plain weave structure, with them to the southern coast.

Alternatively, local Chincha groups may have been influenced by the textile traditions of north coast mitmaqkuna or exchanged with these non-local groups to obtain their textiles.

This is unlikely, however, given the difficulty in emulating spinning and weaving techniques from outside local areas where they are learned and ingrained as motor skills (Minar, 2001; Rowe, 2014, p. 159).

PARAGRAPH

The main contribution of this paper is a methodology for closely examining technical features of textiles and identifying style groups.

We used it to broaden our understanding of communities of textile production in the Chincha Valley.

This methodology can also be applied outside of Andean textiles: it will work to discern patterns in other assemblages of well-preserved textiles and reveal insights into other communities of textile production.