10.1016/j.jasrep.2018.10.031

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Lead (Pb) isotope signatures for silcrete sources from the Willandra Lakes region, Australia: A pilot study of a new method for provenancing silcrete artefacts

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Archaeologists have long been interested in identifying the rock outcrops that provided the raw materials used to make stone tools.

The distribution and characteristics of raw material sources are fundamental to understanding the strategies people employed to ensure that they had raw materials and/or tools available where and when they needed them (Andrefsky, 1994).

The types of stone artefact assemblages found in different parts of the landscape can provide information about the extent of people's home range, the form in which raw material was carried around the landscape and the stone working activities that were undertaken in different locations (Isaac, 1986).

Stone artefacts discarded at greater distances from raw material sources tend to be used more intensively, and are therefore smaller, than stone artefacts discarded near their source (Newman, 1994).

Deviations from this pattern provide the opportunity to investigate the influence of other social and ecological factors, such as access to other resources and the presence of trade and exchange networks (e.g. Blumenschine et al., 2008; McBryde, 1984).

The ability to determine the origin of stone raw materials provides the basis for interpreting patterns of stone artefact discard in these terms.

PARAGRAPH

However, some types of rock are more amenable to sourcing than are others.

Silcrete, which is a sedimentary rock with a high silica content and low fracture toughness, was used often as a raw material for making stone tools and is particularly common in Australia, southern Africa and western Europe (Nash and Ullyott 2007: 95).

Silcrete forms via the silicification of regolith (Thiry and Milnes, 2017) and as a result, retains many of the sedimentological and geochemical characteristics of its parent material (e.g. Webb and Golding, 1998).

Regolith tends to be highly variable within and between regions, which explains the high degree of textural and geochemical variation that characterizes silcrete.

Individual hand specimens sometimes exhibit substantial variation in both color and texture, making it difficult to distinguish silcrete from different sources on the basis of visual characteristics alone.

PARAGRAPH

Studies attempting to distinguish material originating from different sources of silcrete have relied primarily on variations in trace element compositions.

Nash and others (Nash et al., 2013a, 2013b; Nash et al., 2016) explored the potential for using patterns in major and trace element abundance to source silcrete in sub-Saharan Africa, focusing initially on a study of silcrete outcrops in the South African Cape region (Nash et al., 2013a).

They showed that variation in major and trace elements is sometimes linked to the bedrock on which the silcrete formed.

Although artefacts were not included in the initial study, the results suggested that regions where silcrete has formed in association with a variety of different bedrock lithologies are likely to be better candidates for sourcing studies than regions where the bedrock is homogenous.

Subsequently, Nash et al. (2013b, 2016) investigated silcrete sources in the Tsodilo Hills region, which encompasses adjacent regions in Botswana and Namibia, and showed that discriminant function analysis of bulk-sample major and trace element abundances can distinguish outcrops from one another.

However, of the 82 artefacts they studied, only 35.4% were assigned to one of the documented sources (although a conservative confidence level of 99% was used).

Another 24.4% of the artefacts plot just beyond specific source clusters, leading the authors to suggest that sampling may have been insufficient to capture intra-outcrop variation and that these artefacts were likely to have been procured from the sources to which they plot most closely.

They suggest that the remaining 40.2% of artefacts, which are clear outliers on the discriminant function plots, were likely to have been procured from sources that lie beyond the study area.

Given that the efficacy of using major and trace element abundance data to source silcrete artefacts has not yet been demonstrated in other studies, this explanation requires empirical confirmation.

So, although Nash et al.'s (2013a, 2013b, 2016) research has demonstrated significant potential for using major and trace element abundance data to source artefacts made from silcrete, the relatively high proportion of artefacts that do not fit within source clusters does need further investigation.

PARAGRAPH

In Australia, silcrete commonly occurs in one of two contexts: in association with basalt (e.g. Webb et al., 2013; Webb and Golding, 1998) or in association with other substrates in arid, inland settings (e.g. Doelman, 2005, 2008; Doelman et al., 2001; Thiry and Milnes, 1991).

When silcrete forms in association with basalt, the silica is derived from the weathering of the basalt (Webb and Golding, 1998), but in arid, inland contexts like the Willandra Lakes region, the silica is either dissolved out of components of the regolith itself or introduced by fluvial processes from further afield (Thiry and Milnes, 2017).

These formation processes are likely to impact on the potential for identifying the source of the material used to make artefacts.

Basalt-associated silcretes tend to form in localized settings, deriving silica from basalt deposits that often have distinct genetic histories, and thus distinct geochemical characteristics, which may create silcretes with distinct geochemical characteristics.

However, arid, inland silcrete outcrops often represent ground surface exposures of expansive deposits that have a shared genetic history (i.e. they may be part of the same sand-sheet, some or all of which has become silicified by broad-scale processes such as ground water activity).

As a result, different arid, inland outcrops may be more difficult to differentiate from one another than different basalt-associated silcrete outcrops.

PARAGRAPH

Cochrane et al. (2017) investigated the potential for sourcing artefacts made from basalt-associated silcrete from the Arcadia Valley in the central highlands of Queensland, Australia.

Portable XRF analysis was applied to 86 silcrete cobbles collected from three different sources, and to 100 artefacts from nearby surface accumulations.

The samples from the three sources plotted in clusters on the basis of their median iron (Fe) and zirconium (Zr) concentrations.

Although these clusters are not discrete, they are sufficient to demonstrate patterned variation, which provides the rationale for employing Fe and Zr element concentration data as a basis for sourcing the artefacts.

The Fe and Zr concentrations of 75% of the artefacts plot within the 95% confidence ellipses identified for two of the three sources.

None of the artefacts plot within the 95% confidence ellipse identified for the third source, indicating that this source was probably not exploited despite being the same geographical distance from the surface artefact accumulations as one of the other sources.

With respect to the two utilised sources, it is worth noting that the artefacts plot in a continuous distribution, rather than producing clusters that correlate with the geological sample data for these two sources.

If the sources are distinct from one another, and each artefact originated from one of these two sources, it follows that they should cluster with the geological sample data, even if the clusters are quite loose.

The continuous distribution indicates that further investigation is needed.

Nevertheless, the data highlight the possibility of identifying the sources of artefacts made from basalt-associated silcrete.

Furthermore, by ruling out one of the potential sources, Cochrane et al. (2017) were able to determine that geographical proximity was not the most important factor governing raw material source preference in the Arcadia Valley.

PARAGRAPH

Silcrete was the raw material most often used to make stone tools in the Willandra Lakes region (Stern et al., 2013), a relict overflow system located in southwest New South Wales, Australia (Fig. 1).

The sedimentary sequence in this area preserves archaeological sites with an antiquity of at least 45 ka as well as the world's oldest-known ritual ochre burial and the oldest-known cremation (Bowler et al., 2003).

In 1981, these dry lakes and their immediate surroundings were placed on the United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) World Heritage List because of their outstanding natural, and exceptional cultural, features.

The archaeological research conducted in this region has focused primarily on the archaeological traces incorporated into the Mungo lunette, a large, crescentic dune that built up on the leeward side of Lake Mungo, a large, terminal lake within the overflow system (e.g. Bowler, 1998; Bowler et al., 1970; Shawcross, 1998; Spry, 2014; Stern, 2014, 2015; Stern et al., 2013; Tumney, 2011).

During survey work conducted as part of a larger research program, numerous outcrops of silcrete were identified in the area, several of which exhibit signs of having been used as sources of raw material for making stone tools (Kurpiel, 2017).

An understanding of the geographic origin of the silcrete used to make tools has the potential to provide crucial insights into the way that people moved around this landscape.

For example, it could provide detailed insight into the ways mobility strategies changed in response to local environmental and hydrological conditions.

Visually, there is a high degree of variation both within and between sources.

Geochemical techniques, such as Pb isotope analysis, offer a more rigorous approach to the problem of provenancing silcrete than do physical characteristics alone.

PARAGRAPH

Pb isotope studies have a long history in the earth sciences and are used routinely to characterize magmatic rocks and base metal ore deposits (e.g. Gulson, 1986; Sun, 1980) and to provenance sediments (McLennan et al., 1993).

Variations in Pb isotope ratios of rocks, minerals and fluids result from the long-term accumulation of radiogenic 206Pb, 207Pb and 208Pb from radioactive decay of 238U, 235U and 232Th, respectively, with half-lives of 0.7, 4.4 and 14.1 billion years.

Pb isotopic variations exist on all scales and depend on the age, U-Th-Pb concentrations and origin of a given Pb-bearing material (e.g. Faure and Mensing, 2005), providing an excellent isotopic tracer for metals and other Pb-bearing materials.

In archaeology, Pb isotopic variations are used to provenance metal artefacts (e.g. Baron et al., 2011; Ling et al., 2013; Shortland, 2006; Stos-Gale et al., 1997; Ponting et al., 2003), pottery (e.g. Renson et al., 2011; Wolf et al., 2003) and glass (e.g. Henderson et al., 2005).

PARAGRAPH

Pb isotope studies of rocks and minerals used in tool-making are much less common.

Weisler and Woodhead (1995) compared Pb isotope compositions of six basalt artefacts from Henderson Island, a limestone island in the Pitcairn group, with 18 basalt samples collected from deposits scattered across southeastern Polynesia.

This comparison placed the origin of five of the Henderson Island artefacts at nearby Pitcairn Island, while the sixth could be traced to the Gambiers, some 400 km to the west.

This provided evidence that the Pitcairn islands were colonized by people from the Gambiers.

Differences in Pb isotope composition were also noted between ‘shield’ and ‘post-shield’ basalt deposits from the same island, illustrating the power of Pb isotopes as a provenancing tool.

In another study of this type, Collerson and Weisler (2007) combined isotopic data with major and trace element data to compare Polynesian adzes with possible source locations.

Three of the nineteen adzes could be traced precisely, and others could be assigned to likely source regions.

The results were consistent with Hawaiian oral histories that describe prehistoric voyages from Hawai'i to Tahiti and back via the Tuamotus.

PARAGRAPH

More recently, ten Bruggencate and others (ten Bruggencate et al., 2013, 2014) carried out a provenance study of quartz in the Churchill River basin, in central Canada.

In this area, quartz was used to make tools during the pre-contact period and was procured from several different sources.

In order to explore the geochemical variability of these sources, ten Bruggencate et al. (2013) measured Pb isotopes and a small selection of trace elements from seven sources of quartz within a 25 km2 area.

A combination of color, Pb isotope compositions and Ti-Ge concentrations were found to distinguish most of the quartz source locations from one another.

PARAGRAPH

In this contribution, we investigate the Pb isotope composition of six silcrete outcrops that were used as sources of raw material to establish the variation that exists within and between silcrete sources in the Willandra Lakes region.

Such work must be undertaken before inferences can be made regarding the origin of unprovenanced materials (Oulhote et al., 2011: 303), such as stone tools.

To the best of our knowledge the work presented here is the first application of Pb isotopes to the problem of sourcing silcretes used to make stone tools.

SECTION

Materials and methods

PARAGRAPH

Samples for Pb isotope analysis were collected from the Chibnalwood, Mulurulu, Garnpung, Leaghur, Mungo and Zanci silcrete sources, which are distributed along an 85 km stretch of outcrops in the Willandra Lakes region (Figs. 1 & 2).

The Chibnalwood, Garnpung, Leaghur and Mungo silcrete outcrops were previously inferred to be sources of stone tool raw material (e.g. Bowler, 1998: 151) while Mulurulu and Zanci were only recently identified using geological maps, topography and local knowledge to form the basis for targeted survey work.

The samples collected were blocks of silcrete of approximately 25 cm diameter that were partially embedded in the ground.

This sample collection method has not allowed Pb isotope variation to be characterized through the depth of the silcrete profiles; however, avoidance of harm was a strict condition of receiving permission from the Barkindji/Paakantji, Ngyiampaa and Mutthi Mutthi Elders to complete this research, so excavation was not possible.

PARAGRAPH

The two most geographically distant sources, Chibnalwood and Mulurulu (85 km apart), were sampled and analyzed in a pilot study for this project.

This was done (i) because more distant sources are more likely to be genetically and isotopically distinct and (ii) because distinguishing distant sources provides information required for exploring mobility and landscape use across the Willandra Lakes region, which covers an area of 1200 km2.

The Chibnalwood and Mulurulu sources are both approximately 2 km long and 200 m wide, and both exhibit a range of colors, including hues of red, grey and yellow (Fig. 2).

At each source, three hand specimens of fresh silcrete were collected within 5 m of one another, and another three samples were spaced approximately 200 m from these and each other (Fig. 3).

This collection strategy enables the characterization of both intra- and inter-source Pb isotope variation.

The Garnpung, Leaghur, Mungo and Zanci silcrete sources (Fig. 2) were sampled and analyzed following the success of the pilot study.

These sources are located in geographically intermediate positions (i.e. between Chibnalwood and Mulurulu) (Fig. 1) and were sampled for the purpose of collecting more detailed information about Pb isotope variation across the Willandra Lakes region.

While these sources also exhibit substantial color variation, yellow hues are not common at Mungo or Zanci.

At each of these outcrops, two hand specimens of fresh silcrete were collected within 5 m of each other, and another two or three samples were spaced at 100-200 m intervals from these and each other.

Each sample was labeled with a two-letter source identifier and a sequential number.

Samples numbered 1–3 from Chibnalwood and Mulurulu, and samples numbered 1–2 from the other sources, represent the 5 m radius samples.

PARAGRAPH

All sample preparation and analytical work was undertaken in the School of Earth Sciences at the University of Melbourne.

Hand specimens were crushed in a jaw crusher to produce 1–2 cm chips and internal fragments without obvious surface weathering were milled to fine powder in an agate ring mill.

All further sample preparation took place in a HEPA-filtered clean room, using double- and quadruple-distilled suprapure acids (HF, HNO3, HCl, HBr) and water.

Around ~350 mg of each powder was weighed into acid-cleaned teflon beakers and dissolved using 4 ml of 3:1 HF-HNO3, followed by repeated refluxing in concentrated HNO3 and complete dissolution in 6 M HCl.

The clear solutions were split to provide a ~10% aliquot for trace element analysis by quadrupole ICP-MS.

Pb was extracted from the remainder of the sample using a double pass over small (0.15 ml) beds of anion-exchange resin (AG1-X8 100–200 mesh, HBr-HCl).

Procedural blank levels (~100 pg Pb) were negligible relative to the amounts of analyte Pb (600–4000 ng Pb).

Pb isotope ratios were measured on a Nu Plasma multi-collector ICPMS, using the thallium doping method to correct for instrumental bias (Woodhead, 2002).

This produces accurate results with external precisions of 0.03–0.09% (2std dev.),

as estimated from analysis of standards.

For example, the long-term average for Broken Hill galena (206Pb/204Pb 16.004 ± 0.006, 207Pb/204Pb 15.388 ± 0.009, 208Pb/204Pb 35.661 ± 0.027, 2002–2014, n = 73, 2std dev.

absolute) is indistinguishable from the high-precision TIMS-based composition of Richards (1986).

Likewise, the long-term average for synthetic Pb standard SRM981 (16.934 ± 0.007, 15.487 ± 0.010, 36.695 ± 0.031, 2008–2013, n = 420) is indistinguishable from the TIMS-based composition of Richards (1986).

SECTION

Results

PARAGRAPH

The Pb concentrations in the analyzed silcrete samples range from 2.1 to 14.3 ppm (Table 1).

Measured Pb isotope ratios (206Pb/204Pb 19.104–20.099, 207Pb/204Pb 15.661–15.750, 208Pb/204Pb 39.200–39.554; Table 1) are similar to the inferred average composition of the upper continental crust (Asmerom and Jacobsen, 1992; Millot et al., 2004).

A weak anti-correlation exists between 206Pb/204Pb and Pb concentration.

SECTION

Intra and inter source variation

PARAGRAPH

The Willandra Lakes silcretes show Pb isotopic variation both within and between sources (Table 1).

Intra-source isotopic variation does not exhibit spatial patterning (i.e. variation is distributed more or less randomly across each source).

This is illustrated by similar isotopic dispersion for the 5 m radius samples (numbers 1–3 for Chibnalwood/Mulurulu and 1–2 for Garnpung/Leaghur/Mungo/Zanci) and for the respective total data sets (Table 1).

Some sources are more homogeneous than others (e.g. Mulurulu exhibits a limited range of isotope ratios when compared to Chibnalwood).

These patterns do not relate to the size of the outcrop, the number of samples collected or the distances between samples: Mulurulu and Chibnalwood are comparable in size and similar sampling patterns were used for both (6 samples each, collected over approximately 600 m).

The isotopic dispersion observed for Leaghur and Mungo is comparable to that of Mulurulu while Garnpung and Zanci show somewhat greater spread.

SECTION

Differentiating between sources

PARAGRAPH

Inter-source variation in Pb isotope composition is evident, including unambiguous separation between samples from Chibnalwood and Mulurulu, the geographically most distant sources that were sampled initially (Fig. 4).

Pb isotope data for the central group of sources (Garnpung, Leaghur, Zanci and Mungo) define partially overlapping clusters transitional with both the Chibnalwood and Mulurulu fields (Fig. 5).

Despite the overlap, subtle differences are apparent.

For example, Garnpung samples tend to have higher 207Pb/204Pb values at given 206Pb/204Pb values than Mulurulu, Zanci and Mungo, while Zanci, Garnpung and Mungo extend to high 208Pb/204Pb values not observed in Mulurulu.

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

Some degree of intra-source isotopic variation is present at all the Willandra Lakes silcrete outcrops studied (Table 1).

The field collection strategy, which involved collecting a mix of closely and more distantly spaced samples, allowed exploration of this intra-source variation.

The 5 m radius samples exhibited comparable levels of variation to those observed across entire sources (Table 1).

This isotopic heterogeneity illustrates the need to collect multiple samples from multiple locations within silcrete sources in order to produce accurate characterizations.

The degree of intra-source variation is independent of the size of the outcrop; the two largest sources, Chibnalwood and Mulurulu, exhibit the greatest and least variation, respectively.

PARAGRAPH

Inter-source isotopic variation also characterizes the Willandra Lakes silcrete sources.

The data from each source form partially overlapping clusters (Fig. 5), which means that closely-spaced sources cannot be distinguished readily from one another.

By contrast, the sources that are the most widely separated geographically (i.e. Chibnalwood and Mulurulu) can be clearly distinguished from one another because they plot as discrete clusters on Pb isotope diagrams that use 204Pb as the reference mass (Fig. 4).

Being able to distinguish local and non-local stone raw materials facilitates the study of critical aspects of the way past technological systems were organized (Andrefsky, 1994), and is particularly useful for making inferences about mobility patterns (e.g. Tankersley, 1991) and the extent of trade and exchange networks (e.g. McBryde, 1978, 1979, 1984, 2000).

Although complete separation between groups was not evident in this particular case study, the existence of patterned variation in the Pb isotope data suggests that it is a promising analytical tool, particularly for distinguishing basalt-associated silcretes whose Pb isotope compositions are likely to have derived from the distinctive basalt flows with which they are associated and are therefore likely to be more heterogenous than the sources studied here.

PARAGRAPH

The characteristics of the regional geology suggest the Willandra Lakes region silcretes have formed from regolith composed of the weathering products of the underlying Devonian sandstones and/or the Loxton Sands that are present throughout the region, with silicification resulting from a broad-scale process such as the precipitation of silica from groundwater.

The formation history and structure of silcrete deposits in the Willandra Lakes region is not yet well understood.

So far, no studies have addressed whether Pb and other trace elements present in arid, inland silcretes are inherited from the sedimentary substrate, introduced during silicification, or both.

Until this issue has been clarified by systematic silcrete-bedrock comparison studies, possible reasons for within- and inter-source Pb isotope variations for the Willandra Lakes silcretes cannot be evaluated with confidence.

By contrast, silcretes formed in association with individual, chemically-distinct basalt flows are more likely to exhibit strong geochemical differences related to differences in their basaltic substrate.

Cenozoic basalts in southeastern and eastern Australia show considerable Pb isotopic variation (e.g. Ewart et al., 1988; Price et al., 2014), and older (meta-) basalts within the Paleozoic orogens of the region would have even greater Pb isotope ranges in the present.

If the compositions of basalt-associated silcretes are largely substrate-controlled (Webb and Golding, 1998), they would be expected to exhibit greater isotopic heterogeneity than inland, arid silcretes.

Despite lower potential for isotopic variation, the Willandra Lakes silcretes show source-specific isotopic clustering that can be recovered with a relatively modest analytical effort.

On this basis, we predict that well-developed Pb isotope clustering occurs in basalt-associated silcretes, and as a result, there is considerable potential for generating high-resolution data on the use and movement of silcrete in other parts of Australia.

SECTION

Conclusion

PARAGRAPH

Future studies will need to establish how Pb isotope compositions in silcrete relate to their substrates.

This will be critical to a full understanding of what controls isotopic dispersion in silcrete sources.

The dataset produced by this study could be supplemented with data from other regions to investigate this on a broader scale.

There is also much room for enhancing the analytical techniques.

This study was carried out using a bulk rock solution-mode method, on samples weighing 350 mg (although 1 mg would have been sufficient).

Now that the efficacy of this approach has been demonstrated, it would be useful to explore the potential for obtaining silcrete Pb isotope data using microsampling methods, such as laser ablation MC-ICP-MS (e.g. Kent, 2008; Mathez and Waight, 2003; Woodhead et al., 2009).

Such methods have several advantages over conventional bulk methods.

In particular, they are rapid, involve no chemical preparation, cause minimal damage to valuable archaeological specimens and can be integrated with in situ trace element analysis.

On the other hand, a lack of averaging may prove to be problematic for heterogeneous rocks, such as silcrete.

PARAGRAPH

Structured sampling of silcrete sources developed on ubiquitous sand and/or sandstone substrates has produced an understanding of the complex pattern of within-site and between-site Pb isotopic heterogeneity that characterizes silcrete in the Willandra Lakes region.

Despite this complexity, the data allow the geographically most distant silcretes to be distinguished, establishing Pb isotopes as a promising tool for linking silcrete artefacts with their raw material sources.

The ability to better describe the movement of this material has the potential to reveal information about the way people used their landscape and the relationships they may have had with other social groups.

The Willandra Lakes region silcretes studied here formed in an inland, arid context on relatively homogeneous parent materials.

The basalt-associated silcrete that dominates other parts of Australia is likely to exhibit more pronounced inter-source variability, including Pb isotope compositions, than arid zone silcretes.

The method described here is therefore considered to have broad applicability to multiple types of silcrete.

SECTION

Competing interests statement

PARAGRAPH

The authors have no competing interests to declare.