10.1016/j.jhep.2018.02.005

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Apoptosis of enterocytes and nitration of junctional complex proteins promote alcohol-induced gut leakiness and liver injury

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Excessive alcohol intake can damage many organs, causing deaths in severe cases.

Heavy alcohol intake is also known to cause gut leakiness, contributing to increased endotoxemia and inflammatory tissue damage in the liver and brain.1–4

Various pathological conditions, such as HIV infection,5–7 obesity,8 and burn injury,9 are known to increase gut leakiness and endotoxemia.

In addition, binge alcohol10 and non-alcoholic substances such as western-style high-fat diets11 and fructose12 can stimulate gut leakiness, leading to elevated serum endotoxin and liver inflammation.

Furthermore, alcoholic patients with cirrhosis had higher levels of endotoxin than those without cirrhosis.4,13

These conditions observed in humans can be replicated in experimental animals or cultured Caco-2 and T84 colonic cells.

In fact, both other laboratories and ourselves have reported that binge alcohol caused gut leakiness in an ethanol-inducible cytochrome P450-2E1 (CYP2E1)-dependent manner,1,2 since Cyp2e1-null mice were resistant to alcohol-induced gut leakiness despite extremely high doses of alcohol (three oral doses of 6 g ethanol/kg/dose) at 12 h intervals.10

Furthermore, pretreatment with a specific siRNA to CYP2E1 in Caco-2 human colonic cells2 or a chemical inhibitor of CYP2E1 chlormethiazole (CMZ) or an antioxidant N-acetylcysteine10 efficiently prevented alcohol-induced epithelial barrier dysfunction or gut leakiness, supporting the contributing role of CYP2E1-dependent oxidative stress in gut leakiness.

Despites numerous reports, the detailed molecular mechanisms by which binge alcohol and CYP2E1-mediated oxidative stress stimulate gut leakiness are still poorly understood.

PARAGRAPH

We have noticed that Cyp2e1-null mice and WT mice on Svj129 background do not drink the ethanol liquid diet like the C57BL/6 mice.

Thus, we had to use an acute alcohol exposure model by using oral gavages.

To clearly determine the preventive role of CYP2E1 deletion (or suppression) in binge alcohol-induced gut leakiness and tissue injury, we chose to use a rather harsh condition of alcohol exposure (i.e., three consecutive oral gavages of 6 g/kg/dose at 12 h intervals) for mice, although this acute model is not likely to reflect the patterns of alcohol drinking in humans.

Binge alcohol, a pattern of acute alcohol drinking leading to blood alcohol concentration (BAC) ≥0.08% (w/v) within 2 h, can increase and/or activates CYP2E1 and inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS)10 while it can suppress mitochondrial electron transport chain,14 leading to elevated production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and reactive nitrogen species (RNS), resulting in increased oxidative/nitrative (nitroxidative) stress with production of potently toxic peroxynitrite, which can nitrate Tyr residues and/or S-nitrosylate Cys residues.15

Based on elevated nitroxidative stress, we hypothesized that many proteins, especially in intestinal epithelial junctional complexes,16 including tight junction (TJ) and adherens junction (AJ) proteins, are altered by post-translational modifications (PTMs) (e.g., oxidation, nitration, phosphorylation, adduct formation, etc.) followed by their proteasomal degradation and/or suppression, contributing to increased gut leakiness and serum endotoxin levels.

In fact, Keshavarzian and colleagues reported that the decreased levels of TJ and associated proteins, such as microtubule assembly proteins,17,18 played a causal role in alcohol-induced gut leakiness.

Based on these reports,16–18 it is possible that decreased levels of TJ, AJ, desmosome and other junctional complex proteins could contribute to increased gut leakiness.

We also hypothesized that increased apoptosis of enterocytes can stimulate gut permeability, resulting in elevated levels of gut bacteria in the circulating blood and other organs, including the liver, following binge alcohol exposure.

Therefore, we aimed to investigate the roles of covalent protein modifications, especially nitration, of TJ and AJ proteins and apoptosis of enterocytes in binge alcohol-induced gut leakiness in experimental models of rats, mice, and cultured colonic cells, since nitrated proteins are known to be degraded by ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis.19–21

Furthermore, we performed mass-spectral analyses of the TJ-enriched proteins from the intestinal epithelial layers to determine protein identities and demonstrate the loss of TJ, AJ and associated proteins in binge alcohol-exposed rats compared to controls.

We also verified our rodent data with the ileums from eight autopsied individuals who suddenly died from heavy alcohol intoxication vs. six people who perished from non-alcoholic causes (Table 1).

SECTION

Materials and methods

SECTION

Human subjects

PARAGRAPH

This study with the protocol to collect ileums from autopsied human subjects was approved by the Human Subjects Institutional Review Board of the Seoul National University Medical College, Seoul, Korea.

The clinical characteristics of the autopsied people who died suddenly from heavy alcohol intoxication vs. non-alcoholic causes are presented (Table 1).

SECTION

Animal maintenance and experiments, including binge alcohol exposure

PARAGRAPH

All animal experimental procedures were carried out by following the National Institutes of Health (NIH) guidelines for small animal experiments and approved by the NIAAA Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.

The animals housed at 20 ± 2 °C with 12 h light/dark cycles and a relative humidity of 50 ± 5% under filtered, pathogen-free air, with food and water available ad libitum, and were stabilized for at least two weeks prior to each experiment.

Age-matched 6–8 week old female Fischer 344 WT rats (n ≥8/group) as well as young female WT and Cyp2e1-null mice (n = 8/group) were exposed to three oral doses of binge alcohol (6 g/kg/dose) or dextrose (as control) at 12 h intervals and euthanized 1 h after the last ethanol dose, as described.10

SECTION

Immunoblot analysis and immunoprecipitation

PARAGRAPH

Liver and small intestine tissues were lysed with RIPA buffer.

Protein concentrations were determined using the BCA Protein Assay Kit.

For immunoblot analyses for rat tissues, we combined the same amounts of proteins from two different rats within the same group.

The equal amounts of proteins were pooled from four mice randomly selected within the same group (e.g. WT or Cyp2e1-null mice) for immunoblot analyses for mouse tissues.

In other immunoblots especially for statistical analyses, we also combined the same amounts of proteins from two mice (per lane) to evaluate four samples per mouse group.

Equal amounts of protein (a total of 50 µg/lane) combined from different rodents as described, or individual human gut specimens, were separated by SDS/PAGE and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes for immunoblot analyses.

PARAGRAPH

They were incubated with the respective rabbit polyclonal antisera against CYP2E1 (1:5,000 dilution; Abcam), iNOS (1:5,000 dilution; Abcam), 3-NT (1:1,000 dilution; Abcam), occludin (1:50,000 dilution; Thermo Fisher Scientific), claudin-4 (1:1,000 dilution; Thermo Fisher Scientific), p-JNK (1:1,000 dilution; Cell Signaling), p-Ser-Pro or p-Thr-Pro (1;1,000 dilution; Cell Signaling), p-myosin light chain kinase (p-MLCK; 1:1,000 dilution; Thermo Fisher Scientific), TNF-α (1:1,000 dilution; Abcam), TNF-α-receptor-I (TNF-α-RI; 1:1,000 dilution; Abcam), TLR-4 (1:5,000 dilution; Abcam), (activated) cleaved caspase-9 (1:1,000 dilution; Cell Signaling), or cleaved caspase-3 (1:1,000 dilution; Cell Signaling).

PARAGRAPH

Respective mouse monoclonal antibody against claudin-1 (1:10,000 dilution; Thermo- Fishers), JNK (1:1,000 dilution; Cell Signaling), Bax (1:1,000 dilution; Santa Cruz Biotechnology), p-Ser (1:2,000 dilution; Chemicon International), p-Thr (1:1,000 dilution; Santa Cruz Biotechnology), p-Tyr (1:1,000 dilution; Cell Signaling), NLRP3 (1:1,000 dilution; Cell Signaling), or β-actin (1:10,000 dilution; Santa Cruz Biotechnology) was also used to detect the specific target protein, as indicated.

Horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated donkey anti-rabbit or anti-mouse IgG (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) was used as the secondary antibody at a 1:5,000 dilution.

Relative protein images were determined using HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies and ECL substrates (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

The densitometric intensities of the immunoreactive bands were quantified using ImageJ software (NIH).

PARAGRAPH

Immunoprecipitation of small intestinal proteins was carried out, as described previously.19

Briefly, 0.5 mg proteins of gut epithelial proteins pooled from control or alcohol-exposed rats (n ≥6/group) were incubated with the specific antibody to each indicated target protein (e.g., anti-zonula-occludens-1 [ZO-1], anti-β-catenin, or anti-plakoglobin) followed by addition of protein A/G-Sepharose for 4 h at 4 °C with constant head-to-tail rotations.

Sepharose beads were pre-blocked with 2% BSA in PBS before being used for immunoprecipitation.

After incubation, proteins bound to Sepharose beads were washed twice with lysis buffer, four times with ice-cold PBS and mixed with 2x SDS-PAGE gel loading buffer.

Immunoprecipitated proteins were resolved by SDS-PAGE for subsequent immunoblot analyses using the antibody to each target protein, as indicated in the actual figures.

The remaining gels were stained with Coomassie blue to show that similar amounts of antibody were used for immunoprecipitation.

In addition, an appropriate mouse or rat IgG was used as a primary antibody for immunoprecipitation for the purpose of another negative control.

PARAGRAPH

For further details regarding the materials used, please refer to the CTAT table and supplementary information.

SECTION

Results

SECTION

Increased gut leakiness and nitroxidative stress in alcohol-exposed rats

PARAGRAPH

Similar to our previous study with mice,10 we used the same dosage of binge alcohol (three oral doses of 6 g/kg/dose at 12 h intervals) in rats.

Histologically, epithelial detachment and abnormal shapes of intestines (ileums) were frequently observed in alcohol-exposed rats compared to dextrose-controls (Fig. 1A).

BAC at 1 h after the last oral ethanol administration was determined to be approximately 0.2% (w/v) (Fig. 1B).

Plasma endotoxin levels (Fig. 1C) and hepatic levels of E. coli mRNA transcripts determined by real-time RT-PCR (Fig. 1D) were significantly increased in binge alcohol-exposed rats compared to controls.

Plasma ROS and intestinal oxidized protein levels were also significantly elevated in binge alcohol-exposed rats (Fig. 1E, F, respectively).

Additionally, immunoblot showed increased the levels of intestinal nitroxidative marker proteins such as CYP2E1, iNOS and nitrated proteins detected with anti-3-NT antibody, in binge alcohol-exposed rats compared to controls (Fig. 1G).

SECTION

Increased fatty liver, hepatic CYP2E1, hepatocyte apoptosis, and hepatic inflammation following binge alcohol exposure in rats

PARAGRAPH

Increased intestinal permeability promotes translocation of bacterial products like lipopolysaccharide (LPS) to the liver, where they interact with hepatic toll-like receptors (TLRs) and stimulate inflammatory steatohepatitis.8,22,23

Histological analysis showed multiple lipid droplets in hepatocytes after binge alcohol-exposure (Fig. S1A).

Plasma alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and hepatic total triglyceride (TG) levels were elevated in binge alcohol-exposed rats compared to controls (Fig. S1B and C).

PARAGRAPH

The hepatic levels of nitroxidative stress markers CYP2E1, iNOS, nitrated proteins, and TLR-4 were significantly increased by binge alcohol exposure (Fig. S1D).

In addition, hepatic apoptosis-related proteins, phospho-c-Jun-N-terminal protein kinase (p-JNK), p-p38K, cleaved caspase-3, and cleaved caspase-9, were markedly elevated in binge alcohol-exposed rats compared to controls (Fig. S1E).

These results suggest that increased gut permeability and endotoxin likely promoted fat accumulation and hepatocyte apoptosis in alcohol-exposed rats.

PARAGRAPH

Moreover, we observed significantly elevated amounts of hepatic cytokine (TNF-α) and chemokine (MCP-1) in alcohol-exposed rats compared to those of controls (Fig. S2A–E).

The hepatic amounts of inflammation related proteins and mRNAs were significantly elevated in binge alcohol-exposed rats (Fig. S2D and E).

These results showed that binge alcohol stimulated inflammatory hepatic injury.

SECTION

Mass-spectral analyses and decreased gut junctional proteins and increased apoptosis after alcohol exposure in rats

PARAGRAPH

Mass spectrometry analyses of the purified, TJ-enriched fractions from epithelial layers of control or alcohol-exposed rats identified numerous proteins, similar to the previous report.24

However, unlike the previous results obtained with T84 cells where only two TJ proteins (i.e., claudin-16 and zonula-occludens-2) were identified,24 our quantitative, differential mass-spectral analyses not only identified the additional TJ proteins and other epithelial junctional proteins,16 but also found downregulation of many TJ and AJ proteins, desmosome proteins, and α/β-tubulins in alcohol-exposed rats compared to controls (Fig. 2A).

PARAGRAPH

Consistently, immunoblot analyses confirmed the decreased levels of some junctional complex proteins that were identified from the differential mass-spectral analyses.

Immunoblot analyses showed that binge alcohol exposure markedly decreased the levels of TJ proteins; ZO-1, claudin-1, claudin-4, and occludin (Fig. 2B).

In addition, the levels of gut AJ proteins (e.g., β-catenin and E-cadherin), desmosome plakoglobin, and junction associated proteins such as α-tubulin,16 were markedly reduced in alcohol-exposed rats compared to controls (Fig. 2C).

PARAGRAPH

We next studied the role of apoptosis of enterocytes in alcohol-mediated gut leakiness.

Immunoblots showed markedly elevated levels of apoptosis-related marker proteins15 activated p-JNK, cleaved caspase-3 and cleaved caspase-9 in alcohol-exposed rats (Fig. 2D).

Histological terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) analysis clearly showed markedly elevated apoptosis of enterocytes in small intestine of alcohol-exposed rats compared to those of controls (Fig. 2E and Fig. S3).

Additionally, the gut levels of pro-inflammatory cytokine TNF-α, known to disrupt intestinal TJ promoting intestinal barrier dysfunction,25,26 and its receptor protein TNFR-I were significantly increased in binge alcohol-exposed rats compared to controls (Fig. 2F).

Furthermore, ELISA data showed that binge alcohol significantly upregulated the intestinal levels of cytokine TNF-α (Fig. 2G) and chemokine MCP-1 (Fig. 2H).

These results demonstrate elevated gut leakiness through decreased levels of intestinal TJ, AJ and other junctional proteins along with increased apoptosis of enterocytes in alcohol-exposed rats.

SECTION

Role of CYP2E1 and oxidative stress in decreased gut junctional proteins and increased apoptosis in mice

PARAGRAPH

We further evaluated whether the results with rats could be also observed in alcohol-exposed mice.

Consistently, the levels of the markers of gut leakiness, such as plasma endotoxin, fecal albumin, and the E. coli mRNA transcripts present in the liver, were significantly elevated in binge alcohol-exposed WT, but not in the corresponding Cyp2e1-null mice (Fig. 3A–C), as indicated.

Additionally, the levels of oxidized gut proteins were markedly elevated in binge alcohol-exposed WT compared to the untreated controls or the alcohol-exposed Cyp2e1-null mice (Fig. 3D).

PARAGRAPH

Decreased TJ, AJ and desmosome protein contents can contribute to the intestinal barrier dysfunction and leakage.17,18,27

Immunoblots revealed that the amounts of intestinal TJ proteins ZO-1, occludin, claudin-1 and claudin-4 were markedly decreased in alcohol-exposed WT, while their levels were unchanged or very slightly changed in the corresponding Cyp2e1-null mice (Fig. 3E).

Similarly, the levels of gut claudin-2, -3, and -7 isoforms were decreased in alcohol-exposed WT but not in the Cyp2e1-null mice (Fig. S4A).

Significantly decreased claudin isoforms were also observed in the ileums of autopsied people who died from heavy alcohol intoxication compared to controls (Fig. S4B).

The levels of intestinal AJ proteins and desmosome plakoglobin were also markedly decreased in the alcohol-exposed WT compared to the corresponding Cyp2e1-null mice (Fig. 3F).

Furthermore, the levels of apoptosis-related proteins p-JNK, pro-apoptotic Bax and cleaved (activated) caspase-3 were elevated in the alcohol-exposed WT with little changes in the corresponding Cyp2e1-null mice (Fig. 3G).

Histological TUNEL analysis showed markedly elevated apoptosis of enterocytes in the small intestine of the alcohol-exposed WT, but not in the corresponding Cyp2e1-null mice (Fig. 3H).

These results indicate the similar mechanisms of alcohol-induced gut leakiness exist between rats and mice.

SECTION

Role of nitration for ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis in decreased levels of intestinal TJ and AJ proteins

PARAGRAPH

MLCK25 and JNK228 were reported to phosphorylate TJ proteins, leading to their decreased levels with increased intestinal permeability.

Thus, the levels of MLCK targets (containing p-Ser/p-Thr residues) and p-JNK target proteins (containing p-Ser-Pro and p-Thr-Pro residues) were determined.

Immunoblot results showed that the levels of intestinal phospho-MLCK were increased in alcohol-exposed WT, but not in the corresponding Cyp2e1-null mice (Fig. S5A) and in the ileums of alcohol-intoxicated people compared to controls (Fig. S5B).

However, alcohol exposure did not change the gut levels of the various phosphorylation target proteins in mice (Fig. S5C) and in the ileums of alcohol-intoxicated people compared to controls who died from non-alcoholic causes (Fig. S5D), although the amounts of ileum proteins containing phospho-Thr-Pro residues were elevated in people who died from alcohol intoxication.

PARAGRAPH

Mass-spectral analysis did not recognize a specific amino acid for nitration or phosphorylation in each TJ, AJ protein, or desmosome, although their amounts were markedly decreased in binge alcohol-exposed rats compared to those in controls (Fig. 2A).

Since the effect of protein nitration is unknown, we further studied the role of nitration of TJ, AJ and desmosome plakoglobin in decreasing their levels with increased gut leakiness following binge alcohol exposure.

Immunoprecipitation (IP) followed by immunoblot analysis revealed that nitration of claudin-1 and claudin-4 was significantly increased in alcohol-exposed WT compared to dextrose-control mice (Fig. 4A, B).

Additionally, increased amounts of ubiquitin-conjugated proteins were detected in immunoprecipitated claudin-1 or claudin-4 in binge alcohol-exposed WT mice.

In contrast, little changes in the amounts of nitrated and ubiquitinated proteins were observed in alcohol-exposed Cyp2e1-null mice (Fig. 4A, B), suggesting ubiquitin-dependent degradation of the nitrated TJ proteins, as reported.19–21

Consequently, the intestinal levels of claudin-1 and claudin-4 were decreased in alcohol-exposed WT but not in the corresponding Cyp2e1-null mice.

Furthermore, nitration and ubiquitin conjugation of AJ protein β-catenin, desmosome plakoglobin and junctional complex associated proteins, including α-tubulin16 were increased in binge alcohol-exposed WT (Fig. 4C–E), resulting in decreased levels of these AJ and α-tubulin.

However, these alterations were not observed in the alcohol-exposed Cyp2e1-null mice, demonstrating a critical role of CYP2E1 in binge alcohol-mediated gut leakiness through nitration and ubiquitin-dependent degradation of junctional proteins.

Additional results of similar patterns of nitration and ubiquitin conjugation and degradation of the junctional complex proteins with longer film exposures are also shown to support our conclusion (Fig. S6).

SECTION

Increased hepatic inflammation

PARAGRAPH

The increased disruption of intestinal barrier function results in leaky gut.

Gut bacteria can then easily migrate into the blood and the liver.

Consequently, the bacterial translocation is likely to trigger liver inflammation and homeostasis.

Histological analysis showed multiple lipid droplets in the liver of WT mice but not in Cyp2e1-null mice after binge alcohol-exposure (Fig. 5A).

Plasma ALT and hepatic total TG levels were significantly elevated in binge alcohol-exposed WT mice compared to controls or alcohol-exposed Cyp2e1-null mice (Fig. 5B and C, respectively).

The amounts of hepatic cytokine (TNF-α) and chemokine (MCP-1) proteins were significantly increased in alcohol-exposed WT but not in the corresponding Cyp2e1-null mice (Fig. 5D and E, respectively).

Furthermore, alcohol exposure increased the protein amounts of hepatic TLR4, TNF-α, NLRP3 and cleaved caspase-1 in WT, but not in Cyp2e1-null mice (Fig. 5F).

Furthermore, significantly increased mRNA levels of hepatic Nlrp3, Casp1, Il1b and Tnf were observed in alcohol-exposed WT, but not in the corresponding Cyp2e1-null mice (Fig. 5G).

These results indicate that binge alcohol could have promoted inflammatory liver injury at least partly through elevated gut leakiness.

SECTION

Disruption of TJ proteins with elevated apoptosis signals in alcohol-exposed T84 colon cells

PARAGRAPH

To confirm the rodent results and conduct a mechanistic study on alcohol-mediated intestinal barrier dysfunction, T84 colonic cells were treated with 40 mM ethanol and protein lysates evaluated by immunoblot or immunofluorescence analyses.

Immunoblot results exhibited significantly decreased levels of TJ proteins, ZO-1, claudin-1, claudin-4 and occludin in alcohol-exposed T84 cells compared to controls (Fig. S7A).

Confocal immunofluorescence microscopy also showed that alcohol exposure disrupted the normal distribution of ZO-1 (Fig. 6A) and claudin-1 (Fig. 6B).

Consistently, binge alcohol exposure significantly reduced trans-epithelial electrical resistance (TEER) and increased permeation of FITC-labeled 4-kDa dextran (FITC-D4) (Fig. 6C and D, respectively).

However, pretreatment with the CYP2E1 inhibitor CMZ or a specific iNOS inhibitor 1400W efficiently prevented disruption of TJ proteins and epithelial cell permeability in alcohol-exposed T84 cells (Fig. 6).

PARAGRAPH

Furthermore, alcohol exposure damaged T84 cells with increased apoptosis-related marker proteins p-JNK, pro-apoptotic Bax and cleaved caspase-3 (Fig. S7B).

Consistently, pretreatment with the CYP2E1 inhibitor CMZ or the iNOS inhibitor 1400W efficiently prevented the elevation of caspases-3 activity in alcohol-exposed T84 cells (Fig. 6E).

Furthermore, co-treatment with the proteasome inhibitor MG-132, a JNK2 inhibitor SU3327, or an MLCK inhibitor peptide-18 (P-18) also prevented disruption of ZO-1 and epithelial cell permeability in alcohol-exposed T84 cells (Fig. S8).

These results demonstrate the important roles of disruption of TJ proteins and elevated apoptosis of T84 cells in alcohol-induced epithelial cell permeability change.

SECTION

Decreased intestinal TJ and AJ proteins in autopsied people who died suddenly from heavy alcohol intoxication

PARAGRAPH

Increased levels of nitroxidative stress, as reflected by elevated levels of oxidized proteins (Fig. 7A), CYP2E1, iNOS and nitrated proteins (Fig. 7B), were observed in ileums of alcohol-intoxicated individuals compared to people who died from non-alcoholic causes.

The gut levels of TJ (Fig. 7C), AJ proteins and plakoglobin (Fig. 7D) were markedly decreased in the alcohol-intoxicated people compared to the controls.

Furthermore, apoptosis-related marker proteins p-JNK, pro-apoptotic Bax and cleaved caspase-3 were significantly elevated in the ileums from alcohol-intoxicated individuals (Fig. 7E).

These results also indicate that heavy alcohol intoxication increased the levels of CYP2E1, nitroxidative stress and apoptosis of intestinal enterocytes with decreased amounts of TJ, AJ proteins and desmosome plakoglobin in humans, consistent with the results and elevated gut leakiness observed in the experimental models, as summarized (Fig. 7F).

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

It is well-established that large amounts of alcohol intake can cause liver injury by directly damaging the hepatocytes.

For instance, ALD including inflammatory alcoholic steatohepatitis can be promoted through induction and/or activation of hepatic CYP2E1 and iNOS, producing elevated amounts of ROS and RNS, which then stimulate various PTMs of mitochondrial proteins and activate the cell death signaling pathway, contributing to mitochondrial dysfunction and apoptosis of hepatocytes.15

Excessive amounts of alcohol can also stimulate infiltration of neutrophils into the liver with activation of hepatic Kupffer and stellate cells for inflammatory injury.29–31

Binge drinking, which is a prevalent pattern of alcohol intake in many adults, can directly increase apoptosis of hepatocytes via hypoxic liver injury.32

In addition, binge alcohol or chronic excessive alcohol intake can indirectly cause hepatotoxicity through changing intestinal microbiota (dysbiosis) with inflammation and gut leakiness with elevated endotoxin via induction and activation of hepatic TLR4 receptor.8,22,23,31

Various factors such as ethanol,1–4,10 its metabolite acetaldehyde,33,34 increased CYP2E1-mediated ROS10,30 and iNOS-mediated RNS,18,35 gut dysbiosis-mediated inflammation,8,22,23,26 alteration of microRNAs35 etc., were reported to stimulate alcohol-induced gut leakiness.

Co-treatment with antioxidants such as N-acetylcysteine,10 berberine,25 and glutamine36 prevented alcohol-induced gut leakiness.

Furthermore, other non-alcoholic substances such as fructose and western-style high-fat diets were reported to impair the intestinal barrier function with enhanced translocation of bacterial toxins (endotoxemia) to the liver, thereby contributing to inflammatory liver injury.8,11,12,37

PARAGRAPH

The damaging effects of elevated ROS/RNS and peroxynitrite on promoting various PTMs and cell death are not restricted to the liver.

The present results revealed that increased ROS/RNS through induction of intestinal CYP2E1 and iNOS also stimulated PTMs such as oxidation and nitration of junctional complex proteins with elevated apoptosis of enterocytes, leading to gut leakiness in the alcohol-exposed WT mice.

In contrast, these ethanol-mediated changes were not observed in the Cyp2e1-null mice,10 supporting the critical role of increased nitroxidative stress in alcohol-induced intestinal barrier dysfunction and hepatotoxicity.

However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the decreased TJ and other junctional complex proteins, resulting in increased gut leakiness following exposure to binge alcohol or non-alcoholic substances remain unclear.

To the best of our knowledge, the direct roles of nitration of TJ and AJ proteins and apoptosis of intestinal enterocytes have not been systematically studied.

Based on the ubiquitin-dependent degradation of nitrated proteins,19–21 we hypothesized that the decreased levels of TJ and AJ proteins through nitration along with increased apoptosis of enterocytes can contribute to increase epithelial barrier dysfunction and gut permeability at least partly via CYP2E1-mediated events.

Therefore, in this study, we investigated the molecular mechanisms for alcohol-induced gut leakiness by evaluating the levels of nitrated intestinal TJ and/or AJ proteins and apoptosis of enterocytes in WT vs. Cyp2e1-null mice after binge alcohol exposure.

Increased levels of apoptosis-related proteins and decreased intestinal junctional complex proteins led to elevated plasma endotoxin and fecal albumin levels, indicating elevated gut leakiness in alcohol-exposed WT mice in a CYP2E1-dependent manner.

Similar results of increased nitroxidative stress marker proteins and decreased TJ, AJ proteins and desmosome plakoglobin with elevated endotoxin were observed in the alcohol-exposed rat intestines and autopsied human ileums compared to their respective controls.

Mass-spectral and confocal immunofluorescence imaging analyses also confirmed decreased or redistributed TJ, AJ and desmosome proteins in alcohol-exposed specimens compared to the controls.

Furthermore, IP followed by immunoblot analyses confirmed nitration and ubiquitin conjugation of TJ or AJ proteins and associated proteins, indicating ubiquitin-dependent proteolytic degradation of these proteins, as reported.19,20

Although we only studied the role of nitration of only a few selected TJ and AJ proteins out of many proteins associated with the epithelial junctional complexes,16 it is likely that other TJ or AJ proteins, not specifically identified or evaluated in this study, might be also modified by similar mechanisms.

Nonetheless, out current results represent the first report to clearly demonstrate the critical roles of elevated apoptosis of enterocytes and nitration of intestinal TJ and AJ proteins and desmosome plakoglobin in decreased their levels, contributing to increased gut leakiness, endotoxemia and inflammatory liver injury following binge alcohol-exposure (Fig. 7F).

Furthermore, the consistent results not only indicate conserved mechanisms of intestinal barrier dysfunction among different species but also explain the contributing roles of apoptosis of enterocytes and nitration of junctional complex proteins, resulting in decreased levels of TJ/AJ proteins with elevated gut leakiness, as previously reported by many other scientists.16,17,25–28

In this regard, these two main factors may also play, at least partially, important roles in gut leakiness observed after exposure to non-alcoholic substances or under pathological conditions.5–9,11,12

PARAGRAPH

Interestingly, the basal levels of the junctional complex proteins claudin-1, occludin, ZO-1, plakoglobin are significantly decreased in control Cyp2e1-null mice compared to the WT mice, although we do not know the reason(s) for the different basal levels of some, but not all, junctional complex proteins.

The changes in the expressed proteins (or genes) may be frequently observed in many knock-out (or knock-in) mice through adaptation or adjustment to the new physiological states that may develop in response to the deletion of a certain gene, depending on the physiological function of the particular gene.

In our case, it is likely that the lower basal levels of the junctional complex proteins in the Cyp2e1-null mice may reflect the adjustment to the reduced levels of basal oxidative stress in the null mice than WT because of the absence of CYP2E1.

The opposite case of adaptation may be also true for the WT mice.

However, the most critically important fact was that the levels of these junctional proteins were not decreased in Cyp2e1-null mice in response to ethanol when compared to their control levels.

In contrast, the same junctional complex proteins in WT mice were markedly decreased after exposure to alcohol.

Furthermore, the lack of parallel elevation of serum endotoxin levels in ethanol-exposed Cyp2e1-null mice also support our notion that newly adjusted levels of the junctional complex proteins could be sufficient to maintain the gut epithelial barrier function, despite being moderately decreased in Cyp2e1-null mice.

PARAGRAPH

Previous reports indicated that MLCK-mediated25 or JNK2-mediated28 phosphorylation of TJ proteins can contribute to epithelial cell barrier dysfunction.

Thus, we also determined the targets of MLCK (proteins with p-Ser or p-Thr residues) and/or JNK (proteins with p-Thr-Pro or p-Ser-Pro residues) in WT and Cyp2e1-null mice without or with binge alcohol exposure.

However, we did not observe significant differences in the levels of phosphorylated substrate proteins of MLCK and JNK between the alcohol-exposed mice or human ileums and their respective controls (Fig. S5C and D), suggesting little role of MLCK or JNK-mediated protein phosphorylation in our models of binge alcohol-induced gut leakiness.

However, the levels of activated p-MLCK in both alcohol-exposed mouse intestine and human ileums were significantly elevated compared to their corresponding controls (Fig. S5A and B).

Additionally, its levels were not elevated in the Cyp2e1-null mice even after binge alcohol exposure, strongly suggesting a potential role of p-MLCK in regulating gut epithelial barrier function.

The latter notion was further supported by our confocal microscopic image and epithelial barrier function assay results (Fig. S8) with the alcohol-exposed T84 colonic cells in the absence or presence of the selective inhibitor of p-MLCK or p-JNK.

Although we do not know the underlying reason(s) for the different outcomes among our current results (i.e., Fig. S5 and 8) and previous reports,25,28 one possibility could be that the phosphorylation of a specific junctional complex protein as a target substrate of p-MPCK or p-JNK cannot be unambiguously demonstrated by grossly analyzing the whole gut lysates, as we performed (Fig. S5C and D) with the pan-phospho-antibodies, which might not be highly specific.

In addition, binge alcohol exposure observed within a total span of 25 h, as in our model, may not alter the gut microbiome as usually observed in the chronic alcohol feeding paradigm.25,26

Alternatively, it is possible that phosphorylation of junctional complex proteins could be redistributed and inactivated, thus contributing to elevated gut leakiness, although their protein levels may not be altered, like redistributed ZO-1 protein, which remains in the same amounts in alcohol-exposed mice with gut barrier dysfunction.36

Furthermore, under elevated nitroxidative stress, multiple types of PTM of junctional complex proteins can simultaneously take place, as discussed.15

Consequently, it may be difficult to clearly demonstrate the role of a specific PTM (e.g., oxidation vs. nitration or phosphorylation) in regulating gut leakiness or epithelial cell permeability, since oxidation, nitration, phosphorylation and other PTMs can take place simultaneously, as we reviewed.15

In this regard, it is possible that the junctional complex proteins could be phosphorylated by activated p-JNK or p-MLCK.

However, based on the well-established information about ubiquitin-dependent degradation of nitrated proteins,19–21 we specifically aimed at studying the nitration followed by ubiquitin conjugation of junctional complex proteins, leading to their decreased levels.

Our results demonstrate a contributing role of nitration of junctional complex proteins in alcohol-induced gut leakiness.

PARAGRAPH

In conclusion, binge alcohol exposure elevated the levels of CYP2E1, iNOS, p-JNK, nitrated and oxidized proteins in the small intestines of rats, WT mice and autopsied human specimens compared to their respective controls.

Differential mass-spectral analyses revealed that the amounts of several intestinal TJ, AJ, desmosome and junctional complex associated proteins present in control rats were markedly decreased in binge alcohol-exposed rats.

IP followed by immunoblot analyses revealed that selected TJ, AJ proteins and plakoglobin were nitrated and ubiquitinated, leading to their proteasomal degradation in alcohol-exposed WT mice compared to dextrose-controls or alcohol-exposed Cyp2e1-null mice.

Specific inhibitors of CYP2E1 and iNOS significantly prevented disruption of TJ proteins in alcohol-exposed T84 colonic cells.

In addition, elevated levels of apoptosis marker proteins in the enterocytes were observed in alcohol-exposed rats, WT mice and humans compared to their respective controls.

These results from the experimental models and human specimens demonstrate for the first time that nitration followed by decreased levels of some TJ, AJ proteins and desmosomes along with elevated apoptosis of enterocytes contribute to increased gut leakiness, endotoxemia and inflammatory liver disease following alcohol exposure.

SECTION

Financial support

PARAGRAPH

This study was supported by the Intramural Research Program of the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA) and in part with funds from the National Center for Toxicological Research, U.S. Food and Drug Administration (NCTR/FDA).

In addition, this research was partially supported by the Korean Biomedical Scientist Fellowship Program Award (to Y.E. Cho) provided by Korean Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology.

SECTION

Conflict of interest

PARAGRAPH

The authors declare no conflicts of interest that pertain to this work.

PARAGRAPH

Please refer to the accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.

SECTION

Authors’ contributions

PARAGRAPH

Y.E.C. and B.J.S., designed the experiment; Y.E.C., L.R.Y. and S.H.Y. performed experiments; Y.E.C. and B.J.S. wrote the paper; Y.E.C., L.R.Y., S.H.Y., M.A.A. and B.J.S. revised the manuscript.

All authors had access to the study data, contributed to the discussion of results, and approved the final manuscript.