10.1016/j.jhep.2019.06.005

ABSTRACT

TITLE

Defining virus-specific CD8+ TCR repertoires for therapeutic regeneration of T cells against chronic hepatitis E

PARAGRAPH

Immunosuppressed patients with chronic hepatitis E virus infection (cHEV), who are ineligible or have failed current treatment with off-label ribavirin, are a potential target population for T cell-based therapy.

T cell responses are important for viral control.

Herein, we aimed to identify human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-A2 restricted HEV-specific CD8+ T cell epitopes and T cell receptors (TCR) targeting these epitopes, as the basis for a redirected TCR treatment approach for patients with cHEV.

PARAGRAPH

HEV genotype 3 overlapping peptide pools were used to screen HEV-specific CD8+ T cell immune responses in HLA-A2+ patients with acute HEV infection and healthy donors, by intracellular cytokine staining.

CD8+ T cells targeting the identified epitopes were sorted for sequencing of the TCR repertoires by next generation sequencing.

Messenger RNA encoding these TCRs were introduced into lymphocytes of healthy donors and patients with cHEV through TCR redirection.

TCR-engineered lymphocytes were evaluated for Dextramer®-binding capacity, target sensitivity and cytotoxicity against peptide-loaded T2 cells.

PARAGRAPH

HEV-specific responses were observed across open reading frame (ORF)1 and ORF2 of the HEV genome in patients with acute resolving HEV infection.

HLA-A2-restricted HEV-specific CD8+ T cell epitopes targeting the HEV RNA helicase and RNA-dependent RNA polymerase were selected for functional studies.

Introduction of HEV-specific TCRs into lymphocytes of immunocompetent donors and patients with chronic hepatitis E enabled the lymphocytes to bind HEV Dextramers, secrete multiple cytokines and exert cytotoxicity in a target-specific manner.

PARAGRAPH

We identified TCRs that target HEV-specific CD8+ T cell epitopes, and characterized their immune properties, which may have clinical potential in future T cell-based therapy.

