10.1016/j.jhep.2019.11.008

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Inhibition of receptor-interacting protein kinase 1 improves experimental non-alcoholic fatty liver disease

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) has been paralleling the worldwide increase in obesity for the last decades.

It has become the most common chronic liver disease, and now affects up to one third of the adult population in Western countries [1].

NAFLD encompasses a continuum of entities that span from plain steatosis to non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), cirrhosis and ultimately end-stage liver disease [2].

Hepatocyte cell death is a critical event in the progression of all chronic inflammatory liver diseases including NAFLD [3].

Until recently, two main forms of cell death were recognized: apoptosis, which occurs in a highly controlled manner, and necrosis that is accidentally triggered.

However, during the past few years, it became clear that programmed cell death was not restricted to apoptosis, and comprised other forms of regulated cell death [4].

Necroptosis is one of them, combining the molecular machinery of the extrinsic apoptotic pathways with an execution similar to necrosis [4].

Unlike apoptosis that requires the activation of aspartate-specific proteases known as caspases [5], necroptosis is driven by the activation of the receptor-interacting protein kinase (RIPK) 1 and 3, and the pseudo kinase mixed lineage kinase domain-like (MLKL) [4].

Previous studies have shown that ablation of RIPK3 protected mice from the development of steatohepatitis and fibrosis in a methionine and choline-deficient (MCD) diet mouse model [6, 7].

In addition, it has been demonstrated that necroptosis was activated in the hepatocytes of patients with NASH [6-8].

Overall, compelling studies have shown that RIP kinases were pleiotropic modulators of cell death and participated in the pathogenesis of many chronic diseases [9].

Therefore, there is evidence to suggest that by preventing the formation and/or activation of the necrosome, one could limit cell death and possibly disease progression in NASH.

PARAGRAPH

At present, there are limited options to inhibit the necroptosis pathway.

Stable inhibitors that may specifically target RIPK3 or MLKL in vivo, are lacking or induce undesirable effects [10].

The RIPK1 inhibitor necrostatin-1 (Nec-1) has been recognized as a potent inhibitor of necroptosis [11].

However, it is poorly specific, as it also inhibits the indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) pathway.

More recently, RIPA-56 was identified as a highly specific and metabolically stable inhibitor of RIPK1 [12].

PARAGRAPH

In the present study, we investigated whether inhibiting RIPK1 would improve NASH features.

Specifically, we tested the effect of RIPA-56, in human cell and murine models of steatosis and steatohepatitis.

We also explored a hitherto undescribed interaction between the necroptosis pathway and mitochondrial respiration, as a new targetable mechanism of fat accumulation.

In addition, we analyzed if the mediators of necroptosis might serve as markers of activity in NAFLD.

PARAGRAPH

Methods (also see Supplementary data for additional Materials & Methods)

SECTION

RIPA-56 feeding experiment

PARAGRAPH

Six-week-old male C57BL/6J mice (Charles River Laboratories, Ecully, France) were fed a high-fat diet (HFD – 45 kcal% fat) or a normal chow diet (NCD) (Ssniff spezialdiäten GmbH, Soest, Germany) for 16 weeks (the time necessary for an inflammatory and fibrotic response to develop).

The effects of a highly potent and highly specific RIPK1 kinase inhibitor (referred as to RIPA-56) were evaluated by incorporating it into HFD at 300 mg/kg dose as initially described [13].

(see Supplementary data for details).

SECTION

Patients

PARAGRAPH

Serum samples were obtained from 35 subjects with NAFLD (Supplementary Table 1).

The study population was divided in two groups based on the histological score of activity, i.e., the sum of hepatocyte ballooning and lobular inflammation [14].

The first group included subjects with a score < 2, and the second, subjects with a score ≥ 2.

Human samples were processed and stored by the Biological Resource Center, Bio-ICAN, Institute of Cardiometabolism and Nutrition (IHU-ICAN, ANR-10-IAHU-05), Paris, France (https://www.ican-institute.org/bio-ican-2/).

All subjects gave written informed consent before taking part in the study.

SECTION

Isolation and culture of primary human hepatocyte (PHH)

PARAGRAPH

Ethical approval for the isolation of human hepatocytes was granted by the Persons Protection Committee (CPP Ile de France III) and by the French Ministry of Health (N°: COL 2929 and COL 2930).

Liver tissue was obtained from subjects undergoing partial hepatectomy for the treatment of colorectal cancer metastases.

Cell isolation was performed on Human HepCell platform (IHU-ICAN, Paris, France, http://www.ican-institute.org/category/plateformes), as previously described [15] (See Supplementary data for details).

SECTION

Real-time quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR)

PARAGRAPH

Total RNA was extracted using RNeasy columns (Qiagen, Courtaboeuf, France).

The mRNA levels of selected genes (for primers, see Supplementary Table 2) were calculated after normalization to Hprt, Hmbs or GAPDH by using the ΔΔCt method (See Supplementary data for details).

SECTION

Statistical analysis

PARAGRAPH

We calculated sample size using size power analysis methods (GraphPad StatMate) for a priori determination based on the standard deviations of previous experiments.

We calculated the minimal sample size for each group as five animals.

Animals with same sex and same age were employed to minimize physiological variability.

Student t test or analysis of variance (ANOVA) were used to compare two groups and three or more groups, respectively.

GraphPad Prism software (version 6.0) was used to calculate statistical significance.

Statistical tests were used as described in the Figure legends and statistical significance was indicated as follows: *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001; ****p < 0.0001; n.s., not significant.

All data are expressed as mean ± SEM.

SECTION

Results

SECTION

RIPK1 inhibitor reduces necro-inflammatory and fibrotic NASH features in HFD-fed mice

PARAGRAPH

RIPA-56 is a highly potent, selective and metabolically stable RIPK1 inhibitor, able to prevent MLKL activation and MLKL-mediated cell death [12], as we herein confirmed using a well-established cell model of TNFα-induced cell death, i.e., L929 cells [16] (Supplementary Fig. 1A-C).

To explore the therapeutic potential of RIPK1 inhibition in NASH, we tested RIPA-56 in a HFD mouse model.

Six-week-old male C57BL/6J mice were fed NCD or HFD for 16 weeks.

HFD-fed mice received no additional treatment or RIPA-56, which was administered either from the beginning of HFD feeding or 12 weeks later, to mimic prophylactic and curative treatments, respectively (Fig. 1A).

Western blot analyses showed that MLKL and RIPK3, the downstream targets of RIPK1, were overexpressed in the liver of HFD-fed mice compared to NCD-fed mice.

In HFD-fed mice, RIPA-56 repressed their expression in both treatments, with an almost complete inhibition in the prophylactic setting (Fig. 1B).

Likewise, mRNA levels of MLKL and RIPK3 were decreased in both regimens (Supplementary Fig. 2).

In contrast, the expression of RIPK1 was not impacted by RIPA-56 treatment (Fig. 1B and Supplementary Fig. 2).

The increase of serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) in HFD-fed mice (∼5-fold increase compared with NCD-fed mice) was abolished by RIPA-56 in both prophylactic and curative settings suggesting decreased tissue damage in these animals (Fig. 1C).

PARAGRAPH

Histological changes of the liver in HFD-fed mice combined steatosis, inflammatory cell infiltrates and fibrosis (Fig. 1D-I).

Hepatic F4/80 immunostaining confirmed macrophage infiltration in HFD-fed mice (∼10-fold increase compared with NCD-fed mice), which was suppressed by RIPA-56 in both prophylactic and curative treatments (Fig. 1D-E).

In keeping with this observation, the mRNA levels of F4/80 and those of Mcp-1, a potent macrophage chemoattractant, were significantly higher in the liver of HFD-fed mice than in NCD-fed mice (∼3-fold higher each), and this difference disappeared following both regimens with RIPA-56 (Fig. 1F).

The expression of TNFα, a major pro-inflammatory cytokine, was increased in the liver of HFD-fed mice as well (3-fold increase), but not after RIPA-56 prophylactic treatment, and markedly reduced after curative treatment (Fig. 1F).

Likewise, increments in mRNA levels of other inflammatory markers such as Ccl20, Nlrp3 or Il-1b observed in the liver of HFD-fed mice, were abrogated or reduced in RIPA-56-treated mice (Supplementary Fig. 3).

PARAGRAPH

Sirius red staining of liver tissue sections showed that HFD-fed mice developed pericellular fibrosis (10-fold higher than NCD-fed mice), which virtually disappeared following RIPA-56 treatments (Fig. 1G-H).

Collagen-1a1 (Col1a1) mRNA levels were also increased in the liver of HFD-fed mice compared to NCD-fed mice (∼6-fold increase).

They were no longer increased after RIPA-56 prophylactic treatment, and reduced after curative treatment (Fig. 1I).

These data conclusively demonstrated that RIPK1 contributes to the pathogenesis of NASH, and that a prophylactic treatment with the RIPK1 inhibitor RIPA-56 prevents the histologic features of NASH, whereas a curative treatment largely attenuates their intensity.

SECTION

RIPK1 inhibitor reverses steatosis and dampens body weight gain in HFD-fed mice

PARAGRAPH

HFD-fed mice developed obesity.

In a prophylactic setting, when RIPA-56 treatment and HFD were started concomitantly, the mice while still obese gained significantly less body weight than untreated HFD-fed mice (∼12% lower) (Fig. 2A).

These mice displayed a significant decrease in fat and relative fat mass and a trend towards increased in lean and relative lean body mass compared to untreated mice under HFD (Supplementary Fig. 4A-B).

By contrast, in a curative setting, the delayed start of RIPA-56 after 12 weeks of HFD did not result in differences in body weight gain, fat- or lean-mass compared with untreated HFD-fed mice (Fig. 2A and Supplementary Fig. 4A-B).

No significant difference in food intake, spontaneous locomotor activity or respiratory exchange ratio (VCO2-to-VO2 ratio) was observed between HFD-fed groups (Fig. 2B-D).

Yet, using indirect calorimetry, we noted that energy expenditure was increased in HFD-fed mice, following RIPA-56 prophylactic treatment as compared to those that received RIPA-56 curative treatment or no treatment (Fig. 2E), which could have at least partly contributed to lower body weight gain in these mice.

Interestingly, even though HFD-fed mice remained obese after both curative and prophylactic RIPA-56 administration, steatosis was largely reduced in both settings (Fig. 2F-H).

RIPA-56 caused a marked decrease in hepatic fat content as measured by blinded histological analyses (Fig. 2F-G) and by hepatic triglyceride content (∼30-40% reduction) (Fig. 2H).

Collectively, these findings indicated that RIPK1 inhibition improved HFD-induced hepatic steatosis.

SECTION

RIPK1 inhibition promotes fat depletion in primary human steatotic hepatocytes

PARAGRAPH

To test whether RIPA-56 could directly act on hepatocytes, we first used a model of primary human steatotic hepatocytes.

Hepatocytes isolated from the liver of patients with NAFLD were treated after 48 hours of primary culture with RIPA-56 or vehicle (DMSO) for 24 hours.

Intracellular lipid content was assessed by Oil Red-O staining and triglyceride assay (Fig. 3A-C).

RIPA-56-treated steatotic hepatocytes underwent a marked decrease in intracellular lipid droplets (Fig. 3A-B) and triglyceride content (Fig. 3C).

To gain insight into the underlying mechanisms, we used primary human hepatocytes, in which steatosis was induced by incubation with a free fatty-acid mixture (oleic acid and palmitic acid, in a molar ratio of 2:1), for 48 hours.

Free fatty acid-induced lipid droplets increased by approximately 2- to 3-fold within 48 hours without affecting cell viability (Supplementary Fig. 5A-D).

Akin to hepatocytes isolated from steatotic liver, primary human hepatocytes in which steatosis was induced in vitro, underwent a significant decrease in intracellular lipid droplets (Fig. 3D-E) and triglyceride content (Fig. 3F) in response to RIPA-56.

This coexisted with an up-regulation of CPT1A, APOB100 and MTTP expression, suggesting that increased fatty acid β-oxidation and/or triglyceride export contributed to the anti-steatotic action of RIPA-56 (Fig. 3G).

SECTION

MLKL, a downstream target of RIPK1, regulates triglyceride content in hepatocytes

PARAGRAPH

MLKL is a downstream target of RIPK1, the phosphorylation and activation of which are inhibited by RIPA-56 within hours (Supplementary Fig. 1).

Also, the expression of MLKL is down-regulated in the liver of HFD-fed mice after several weeks of RIPA-56 treatment (Fig. 1B and Supplementary Fig.2).

Therefore, we hypothesized that MLKL inhibition may be accountable for the fat depletion induced by RIPA-56 in steatotic hepatocytes and tested whether necrosulfonamide, a specific inhibitor of human MLKL, reduced cellular fat in human steatotic hepatocytes.

Figure 4 shows that necrosulfonamide significantly decreased intracellular lipid droplets (Fig. 4A-B) and triglyceride content (Fig. 4C), and upregulated CPT1A expression (Fig. 4D).

We also sought to determine if MLKL ablation would reproduce the defatting effect seen in hepatocytes exposed to necrosulfonamide.

We knocked out (KO) MLKL using CRISPR-Cas9, in immortalized murine hepatocytes (AML-12 cell line), in which fatty acid metabolism closely resembles that of primary hepatocytes [17].

Efficient KO was confirmed by western blot analysis (Fig. 4E).

Following 48-hour incubation with free fatty acids, intracellular triglyceride accumulation was significantly lower in MLKL-KO cells than in controls (Fig. 4F-H).

Overall, these findings indicate that destabilizing the necrosome by inhibiting RIPK1 or the final executioner MLKL, or by removing MLKL, is sufficient to decrease triglyceride content in hepatocytes.

Thus, the RIPK1/MLKL axis appears to be a major pathway of hepatic lipid accumulation in NAFLD.

SECTION

MLKL regulates mitochondrial biomass and activity

PARAGRAPH

To gain further insight into the mechanisms whereby the RIPK1/MLKL axis controls fat storage in hepatocytes, we examined mitochondrial activity in MLKL-KO cells.

MLKL-KO cells exhibited an apparent increase in viability, as assessed by the MTT assay (Fig. 5A).

This effect was independent of proliferation, which was not different between KO and control cells, as shown by BrdU assay (Fig. 5B) and xCELLigence real-time cell analysis (Fig. 5C).

MTT is reduced in metabolically active cells, in part by the action of the mitochondrial dehydrogenase enzyme.

We measured the mitochondrial mass and found a moderate but significant increase in KO cells, as compared to controls (Fig. 5D).

Likewise, the mRNA levels of Pgc1a, a master regulator of mitochondrial biogenesis, were significantly increased in KO cells (Fig. 5E).

Based on these findings, we anticipated that the mitochondrial activity would be increased in KO cell line.

We measured the expression of genes involved in fatty acid β-oxidation (Cpt1a, Acox1), and found that they were overexpressed in KO cells, compared to controls (Fig. 5E).

We also compared the bioenergetic status of these cells, and performed mitochondrial respiration tests.

MLKL-KO cells had a markedly higher basal mitochondrial respiration than control cells (Fig. 5F-G).

To distinguish oxygen consumption devoted to ATP synthesis from that due to the natural proton leak across the inner mitochondrial membrane, we added the ATP synthase inhibitor oligomycin, which showed that ATP-linked respiration was increased in KO cells (Fig. 5F-G).

The addition of the accelerator ionophore FCCP, which leads to a rapid consumption of oxygen without the generation of ATP, showed that KO cells had a markedly higher maximum respiratory rate than control cells (Fig. 5F-G).

PARAGRAPH

Finally, we assessed whether RIPK3-KO mice with NASH induced by a choline-deficient, amino acid-defined (CDAA) diet, would also display improved mitochondrial bioenergetics as compared with WT mice (Supplementary Fig. 6A-C).

First, we found that RIPK3-KO mice had significantly lower levels of phosphorylated MLKL (p-MLKL) compared with WT mice fed the same diet (Supplementary Fig. 6A).

Along with MLKL decreased activation, activities of citrate synthase (CS) and mitochondrial respiratory chain (MRC) complexes in liver mitochondria, particularly the complex II+III, were significantly enhanced in RIPK3-KO mice compared with WT mice (Supplementary Fig. 6B).

These differences between WT and KO mice were even more profound after a longer feeding period (Supplementary Fig. 6B).

Likewise, the mRNA levels of Pgc1a and Acox1 were both significantly increased in RIPK3-KO mice compared with WT mice at 32 weeks (Supplementary Fig. 6C).

Collectively, these data point to a novel function of MLKL activation through the regulation of mitochondrial respiration.

SECTION

RIPK1 and MLKL are increased in the serum of patients with NASH

PARAGRAPH

The serum concentrations of proteins mediating necroptosis were previously found to be elevated in patients with tissue injury caused by sepsis [18, 19], raising the possibility that this may also occur in patients with NAFLD, as a result of necro-inflammatory activity.

We measured the serum concentrations of RIPK1 and MLKL proteins, in 35 patients with NAFLD, and found that their concentration was markedly increased in the serum of patients with active disease (histological activity score ≥ 2 vs. < 2) (Supplementary Table 1 and Fig. 6A-B).

The serum concentration of both proteins was positively correlated with ALT (Fig. 6C-D).

To confirm that mediators of necroptosis might be released in the extracellular milieu during necroptosis, we tested whether L929 cells exposed to TNFα, released RIPK1 in their supernatant.

We found that RIPK1 was released in the supernatant of L929 cells exposed to TNFα, notably in the presence of Zvad, but remained undetectable, when necroptosis was abrogated by RIPA-56 or Nec-1 treatment of the cells (Fig. 6E).

Altogether, these findings suggest that necroptosis contributes to the pathogenesis of NAFLD, and that the release of RIPK1 and MLKL into the systemic circulation, reflects necro-inflammatory activity in human NAFLD.

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

The present study provides evidence to indicate that RIPK1 inhibition and subsequent downstream necrosome inactivation improves all histologic features of NASH including liver inflammation and fibrosis.

Importantly, we show that RIPK1/MLKL also controls lipid homeostasis and cellular fat deposition.

Therefore, the RIPK1/MLKL axis could be a valuable therapeutic target in NAFLD/NASH.

PARAGRAPH

The cell commitment towards apoptosis or necroptosis is largely dependent on the interactions between caspase 8 and RIPK3 [3].

If a member of the necrosome is altered, a switch between apoptosis and necroptosis can occur.

Thus, although RIPK3-deficient mice are protected from MCD diet-induced experimental NASH [6, 7], when RIPK3 is inactivated with the use of a specific kinase inhibitor it may serve as a pro-apoptotic platform leading to the activation of RIPK1-dependent apoptosis [10, 20].

Also, while Chenxu et al. showed that invalidating RIPK3 by repeated injections of siRNAs protected mice against HFD-induced hepatosteatosis and metabolic syndrome [21], an excessive sensitivity of hepatocytes and adipocytes to apoptosis has been observed on the contrary, in HFD-fed RIPK3-deficient mice [22, 23].

Noteworthily, although markedly reduced, the expression of RIPK3 was not completely abolished in siRNAs treated mice [21], suggesting that keeping low levels of RIPK3 might be beneficial also in the HFD experimental model of NASH.

Collectively, the effect of RIPK3 inhibition in NASH could be cell context-dependent and its therapeutic use, hazardous.

In contrast, specifically targeting RIPK1, which is upstream of RIPK3 and a key player in cell death controlling both apoptotic and necroptotic signaling pathways should be more effective [24].

Here, we addressed the therapeutic potential of RIPA-56, a specific inhibitor of RIPK1 [12], in HFD-fed mice, both in a prophylactic and curative setting, i.e., after NASH features were already established.

RIPA-56 significantly reduced all liver features associated with steatohepatitis, including inflammation and liver fibrosis.

While in the prophylactic setting, RIPK1 inhibition slightly reduced HFD-induced weight gain, the overall improvement in liver injury most likely resulted from a direct action rather than being a mere consequence of weight changes.

PARAGRAPH

The complete mechanism underlying necroptosis is still unclear.

It was established that the kinase activity of RIPK1 was a prerequisite for necrosome assembly via phosphorylation, the activation of RIPK3 and its association with MLKL [25].

In the present study, we found that RIPA-56 treatment effectively suppressed RIPK3 and MLKL expression while the expression of RIPK1 remained unchanged (Fig. 1B and Supplementary Fig. 2).

This observation is consistent with other studies showing that chronic inhibition of RIPK1 can lead to reduced expression of RIPK3 and/or MLKL in different inflammatory rodent models [26-29].

Inhibiting the kinase activity of RIPK1 may result in an increased stability of RIPK1.

This possibility is even more likely when inhibition is provoked by RIPA-56, which is highly stable in vivo with a half-life of 3.1 hours compared to a half-life < 5 mins for Necrostatin-1 [12].

However, additional investigations are needed to decipher how the inhibition of RIPK1 kinase activity can affect the stability of the necrosome complex.

PARAGRAPH

In addition to key functions in HFD-induced NASH, we herein report that RIPK1 also regulates hepatic steatosis, as shown in the whole liver and in isolated hepatocytes.

The mechanism of fat depletion resulting from RIPK1 inhibition, might involve increased mitochondrial activity, which in turn promotes fat mobilization, probably through β-oxidation.

This effect might be mediated through MLKL as we showed that MLKL controls mitochondrial biomass and respiration in cultured AML-12 hepatocytes, and that along with decreased hepatic levels of p-MLKL, RIPK3-KO mice exhibited increased activities of the liver mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes in experimental NASH, as compared with WT mice.

Moreover, we found that the absence of MLKL promoted a significant reduction of triglyceride content in fat-loaded AML-12 hepatocytes, and pharmacological inhibition of MLKL by NSA treatment in fat-loaded PHH, reduced the cellular triglyceride content as efficiently as RIPA-56 treatment.

Therefore, MLKL appears as a candidate target to restore mitochondrial function in NAFLD.

PARAGRAPH

Interestingly, patients with NASH display hepatic mitochondrial dysfunction, characterized by a decrease in maximal respiration despite an increase in mitochondrial mass [30].

Consequently, the inhibition of the necrosome pathways might also prove beneficial by restoring mitochondrial respiration in patients with NASH.

This might result in less steatosis in addition to reduced liver injury and fibrosis as shown here in rodent models.

Since an overall reduction of steatosis could result in less lipotoxic lipid species, this could also contribute to an anti-fibrotic response [31].

PARAGRAPH

Another intriguing finding is that RIPA-56 prophylactic treatment caused a decrease in weight gain.

This finding is in agreement with a recent study showing that MLKL ablation protected mice against obesity [32].

In this latter study, Xu et al. showed that the inhibition of RIPK1, RIPK3 or MLKL, by RNAi or pharmacological inhibitors enhanced insulin signaling in vitro and in vivo [32].

These data are in line with those obtained in our cellular model showing that MLKL ablation increased insulin signaling sensitivity in AML-12 cells (Supplementary Fig. 7).

Altogether, this suggests that pharmacological inhibition of RIPK1 could provide a dual benefit in patients with NAFLD by lowering intracellular triglycerides stores in steatotic hepatocytes and by reducing insulin resistance [33].

PARAGRAPH

The clinical relevance of our experimental data is supported by the fact that in a small population of patients with NAFLD, the serum concentrations of RIPK1 and MLKL increased with histological activity and correlated with aminotransferase levels.

These findings suggest that a blood-based non-invasive assessment of necroptosis could be useful to identify among patients with NAFLD those who develop active steatohepatitis.

However, dedicated studies including a large number of patients are necessary to address the potential interest of measuring markers of necroptosis in serum.

PARAGRAPH

In summary, we have shown that inhibiting RIPK1 and the necrosome pathway in dietary models caused a significant improvement in NASH features in vivo, including steatosis, liver inflammation and fibrosis.

We uncovered a novel function of RIPK1/MLKL pathway in the regulation of mitochondrial respiration, which contributes to fat accumulation, notably in hepatocytes.

The systemic release of necrosome proteins in patients displaying disease activity supports the clinical importance of this pathway in NASH.

Therefore, necroptosis emerges as a major contributor to NAFLD/NASH pathogenesis, and a potential therapeutic target in this disease.