10.1016/j.jasrep.2018.11.017

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Improving the chronological framework for Laugerie-Haute Ouest (Dordogne, France)

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Understanding change in the archaeological record requires control of chronology.

Here we present a high-resolution chronology for one of the key sequences for the European Upper Paleolithic, the large rockshelter site of Laugerie-Haute (Périgord, Dordogne, Southwest France).

The two sedimentary sequences at Laugerie-Haute-Est and -Ouest together cover the main phases of the Upper Paleolithic of Western Europe.

The archaeological significance of the site is recognized in its status as a national monument and a UNESCO World Heritage site.

Despite the status of the Laugerie-Haute site, its long research history and its much discussed Solutrean levels, the chronology of the sedimentary sequence of Laugerie-Haute is not firmly established.

In this paper, we present a radiocarbon-based chronology for the complete sedimentary sequence of Laugerie-Haute Ouest.

SECTION

The site

PARAGRAPH

The Laugerie-Haute site is a vast rock-shelter facing south-southeast, on the right bank of the Vézère river, about 2 km upstream from Les Eyzies-de-Tayac (Fig. 1).

It is 180 m long, and has a sedimentary infill of 4.5–6 m in thickness.

The shelter is about 30 m deep, while fieldwork in front of the eastern part of Laugerie-Haute has demonstrated that the cone of the rock shelter deposits has an extension far into the floodplain in front of the abri, where the archaeological deposits are covered by late Holocene fine-grained river sediments.

This gives the rock shelter deposits a southern extension of about 70 m, with later erosion of these deposits truncating the greater part of these sediments (Roebroeks et al., 2011).

PARAGRAPH

The site of Laugerie-Haute has yielded a vast amount of Upper Paleolithic material in its long history of excavations, which took place both in its western (Laugerie-Haute Ouest – LHO) and eastern (Laugerie-Haute Est) parts.

These are separated by a non-excavated sedimentary sequence of about 60 m in length, overlain and protected by a historical building.

Lartet and Christie discovered the site in 1863, and after a series of small excavations before World War 1, all in fact of little value, D. and E. Peyrony carried out large-scale excavations at the sites from 1921 to 1935, linking up the rich sequences from the eastern and western parts, and publishing their results in a monograph in 1938.

D. Peyrony focused on the stratigraphy and the succession of the archaeological layers in the site.

On the basis of granulometry, colour, archaeological and faunal content he identified 11 levels at LHO (Peyrony and Peyrony, 1938; Texier, 2009).

The excavations by Francois Bordes and Philip Smith in 1957–1960 included the Solutrean levels at LHO, which were described at great length in Smith's volume on the Solutrean in France (Smith, 1966).

In the context of their excavations, Laville made a sedimentological study of the sequence at LHO, that focused on establishing a climatostratigraphy for the site (Laville, 1964; Laville, 1973).

He identified 24 distinct levels at LHO (0−23), a division which was also the framework for the publications of the LHO archaeology by Bordes and Smith.

Since Laville, little research has taken place at the shelter, with the notable exception of a geological study by Texier (Texier, 2009).

PARAGRAPH

Philip Smith (1966:57) called Laugerie-Haute the central pillar of the French Solutrean, because of historical reasons – it was the first Solutrean site submitted to a scientific excavation - and, more importantly, all the main Solutrean phases were present in a secure stratigraphic setting.

However, based on fabric analysis of the LHO deposits, Texier (2009) has argued the importance of solifluction processes for the formation of the site.

In addition to displacement of objects, the slope movement could have led to the formation of pseudo-layers; a single archaeological layer then has the appearance of a sequence of layers separated by ‘sterile’ sediment (see Texier, 2009, Fig. 136).

In addition, Delpech (2012) concluded from the study of the herbivore biostratigraphy that units are not in “normal” chronological order and that the Solutrean layers should be considered as one biostratigraphic unit.

Archaeological studies have also called into question the representation of Solutrean phases as well as the stratigraphic integrity of the site (Aubry and Almeida, 2013; Bosselin and Djindjian, 1997; Demars, 1995a; Demars, 1995b).

PARAGRAPH

The Laugerie-Haute sequence also includes an archaeological industry dominated by carinated elements overlying Gravettian levels and preceding the lower Solutrean, the so-called “Aurignacian V”, revealed by Peyrony's works in the western part of the site and Bordes' excavations in the Eastern part (Bordes, 1958; Sonneville-Bordes and Bordes, 1958).

This industry was first considered as a final stage of the Aurignacian technocomplex until the evidence of an important gap in the radiocarbon chronology led authors to consider it as an independent “cultural entity” (Sonneville-Bordes, 1982).

However, Bordes included in his assemblage all Aurignacian-like carinated elements issuing from under- and overlying levels; such a process of biased selection in the collection construction accounts for the “specialized” nature of the assemblage (Almeida, 2006).

The “Aurignacian V” sites are particularly rare, in fact only known from Laugerie-Haute up to the mid-1990s when excavations at Abri Casserole revealed assemblages with similar typological characteristics in a similar stratigraphic position (Aubry et al., 1995).

Zilhão and Aubry (1995) group the French “Aurignacian V” assemblages together with similar industries from the Gravettian-to-Solutrean transition in Portugal into a single entity named Protosolutrean (Zilhão et al., 1997; Zilhão et al., 1999; Zilhão, 2013).

The “Aurignacian V” could also be a functional “facies” of the Gravettian and/or Solutrean (cf. Aubry et al., 1995) or a substage of the Protosolutrean (Zilhão et al., 1999; Zilhão, 2013).

As pointed out by Renard (2010), our understanding of the Gravettian-to-Solutrean transition in Western Europe is hindered by the lack of dating of the sites.

SECTION

Previous work on the chronology

PARAGRAPH

Previous work on the chronology of Laugerie-Haute Ouest focused on the age of the Solutrean levels.

A series of radiocarbon dates is available from the laboratories in Groningen (The Netherlands), Lyon and Gif-sur-Yvette (both in France) (Table 1).

Thermoluminescence dates were obtained on heated quartz pebbles from the Solutrean levels at the site (Table 2).

The established subdivision of the LHO sequence based on Solutrean typochronology was not reflected in significant chronological differences between the various levels.

While this could be read as demonstrating a short duration of the Solutrean (Texier, 2009), some researchers have interpreted these dates as indicative of reworking of the stratigraphy at the site, inducing a mixture of materials from various periods (Delpech, 2012).

In contrast, others have used the same dates to support a two-phase subdivision of the Solutrean at Laugerie-Haute (Bosselin and Djindjian, 1997).

PARAGRAPH

However, the basis of the chronology is problematic.

First, the published dates only cover the Solutrean levels.

The other levels above and below the Solutrean are not dated.

Second, none of the samples have exact, published provenances.

Third, almost all the radiocarbon dates are on bulk samples of “burnt bone”, a sample type that is often found to produce inaccurate age estimates (see discussion in Higham et al., 2011).

To improve the chronological control of the sequence at Laugerie-Haute Ouest, a new series of samples was collected from the existing sections.

SECTION

Methods

SECTION

Sampling strategy

PARAGRAPH

Seventy-five years after Peyrony's excavations at LHO, the majority of his sections are still exposed, a the east section (“coupe transversale”) and southeast section (“coupe longitudinale”) of the site (Peyrony and Peyrony, 1938), subsequently modified by the excavations of Bordes and Smith.

It was the east section, where D. Peyrony labelled his cultural layers after his excavations, as shown here in Fig. 2.

This exposure is now partly covered with algae and dust which makes it difficult to identify the original layers.

We searched all obvious layers for the presence of macroscopically well-preserved, compact long bone fragments and examined them for evidence of heating (based on colour) before collection, to eliminate unsuitable bone.

Multiple bones were sampled for each layer since the collagen may not have been preserved in all bones.

PARAGRAPH

Ten samples were taken from the east section (Fig. 3) and their position measured relative to a fixed point (our iron hook datum 63.802 m asl) while the levels were also followed into the larger southeast section.

Twenty-eight bone samples were taken from the southeast section, where we initially used the Bordes and Smith drawing as an indicator of cultural layers.

A lack of clear definition in their section drawing made it difficult to relate our sampling in a precise way with the earlier excavations.

Consequently, we drew the southeast section again using a laser level and the established height datum, and thus documented the elevation and extent of the various find levels in the site following Peyrony's subdivision and schematic section drawings (including his “Aurignacian V”, and Peyrony's H′ (Solutréen à pointes à face plane) as well as layer H″ Solutréen à feuilles de laurier).

We were also able to “reconstruct” the excavation grid system of Bordes' and Smith's excavations in the long section and indicated this with red plastic “caps” over nails inserted in the section wall.

Eventually, the location of each bone sample was photographed and measured relative to our datum point and the exact position indicated in the section photo (Fig. 4) and drawing (Fig. 5).

PARAGRAPH

The sampling of the exposed east and southeast section of the LHO site took place in 2012.

Two series of samples were taken: LHO 1 to 38 resp.

LHO 12.09–15 (Table 3).

This was undertaken under a permit issued to Dr. Arnaud Lenoble, PACEA, University of Bordeaux, Authorization Order N °: 2012–67 (Lenoble et al., 2013; Lenoble and Cosgrove, 2016).

The dates published here supersede previously reported uncalibrated radiocarbon ages (Lenoble et al., 2013).

A new bone-specific background (>51Kya) standard has now been fully tested and necessary background 14C correction used in age calculation revised by the Waikato Radiocarbon Dating Laboratory (2017).

The new background standard has been applied to the LHO dates and the corrected dates are presented here for the first time.

SECTION

Laboratory procedures

PARAGRAPH

The collagen from each bone was extracted and divided into two samples: one analysed for stable isotopes and the other for radiocarbon dating.

Bone dates were prepared at the Waikato Radiocarbon Dating Unit AMS facility (New Zealand) following bone ultrafiltration methodologies outlined in Bronk Ramsey et al. (2004) and Petchey et al. (2014).

Waikato gelatine stable isotope measurements used for dietary reconstruction and quality assurance (QA) were measured at Iso-trace Research Department of Chemistry, University of Otago (New Zealand) on a Carlo Erba NA 1500 elemental analyser (EA), coupled with either a Europa Scientific ‘20/20 Hydra’ or a Thermo Finnigan Delta Plus Advantage.

AMS targets were prepared at Waikato and measured at the Keck Radiocarbon Laboratory, University of California (Southon and Santos, 2007 and references therein).

One complementary date was prepared at the Lyon Dating Center for Radiocarbon (France) and measured at the Saclay spectrometry center (France) (Oberlin and Valladas, 2015).

PARAGRAPH

Bone isotope QA parameters (% gelatin yield, %N, %C and C:N) have been adapted specifically for 14C use by van Klinken (1999), who noted that most well-preserved archaeological bone protein has a %N value that ranges between 11 and 16, a %C value between 30 and 45, and a C:N ratio range of 3.1–3.5.

Because it is still possible for contaminated samples to give acceptable QA values, the amount of extractable protein (% ultrafiltered gelatin yield) was also used as a guide to the reliability of the 14C results.

Samples yielding <0.5% of the starting weight of bone powder are treated with caution (Petchey et al., 2014).

Bone isotope QA parameters (% gelatin yield, %N, %C and C:N) and isotope results (δ13C, δ15N and 14C) are given in Table 3.

SECTION

Calibration and Bayesian modelling

PARAGRAPH

All radiocarbon dates in this paper have been calibrated against IntCal13 (Reimer et al., 2013) in OxCal v.4.3 (Bronk Ramsey, 2017).

Bayesian modelling (Bronk Ramsey, 2009a) has been undertaken in OxCal v4.3 using both the new and previously published dates.

The dates were arranged in phases corresponding with the depositional layers (see SI 1).

The early series of dates from Groningen include a number of samples where both the alkali soluble and insoluble components were dated (in Table 1 extract and residue respectively, see Vogel and Waterbolk, 1963).

This was done to establish contamination affecting the age of the ‘collagen’, in case some was not removed during pretreatment.

Where two radiocarbon dates on one sample produced statistically indistinguishable dates, the weighted average was calibrated and included in the model.

Where two radiocarbon dates on one sample produced different dates, the result was not included in the model.

All dates included in the model were assigned a 5% prior probability of being an outlier within the General t-type Outlier Model (Bronk Ramsey, 2009b).

All calibrated dates are given at 95.4% probability unless otherwise stated.

TL dates were not included in the model as the large error terms mean they have little impact on the model.

SECTION

Results

PARAGRAPH

From the total of 38 samples taken from the sections, 28 samples were submitted for dating.

Generally, the collagen yields are very low with only two samples with yields above 1% and 16 below 0.5%.

Eleven samples did not yield sufficient collagen for dating and stable isotopes: five samples were abandoned altogether and six samples were used for isotope data only (Table 3).

One sample also had a C:N-ratio that was outside the acceptable parameters at 3.9 and was not dated.

Seventeen AMS radiocarbon samples were successfully analysed (Table 3).

Five samples with low collagen yields (between 0.2 and 0.4%) were dated.

It was considered important to date these samples because two samples were positioned at the boundary of our layers 2 and 3 (base of Peyrony's layer I), one sample dated layer 6 (correlated to Peyrony's layer H″), while two others in the east section were positioned in layer 10 (correlated with Peyrony's layer D).

Sample LHO 12.11 from the upper part of layer 11 was not included in the statistical analysis because the C:N-ratio of 2.6 was outside our acceptable parameters.

The remaining 12 samples have sufficient collagen yields, C:N-ratios are within acceptable levels and stable isotopic values are within the typical range of terrestrial herbivores.

PARAGRAPH

The samples cover a large part of the existing sections and thus provide an indication of the relative rate of sediment build-up.

A Bayesian model is presented in Fig. 6.

Modeled boundary ranges are presented in Table 4.

The model includes both the new and previously published radiocarbon dates, with the exception of the GrN-4446 and GrN-4469, two dates on a single bone which gave inconsistent dates (Χ2 df = 1, T = 12.3, 5% = 3.8).

Convergence is >95% for all parameters except two, suggesting that the model is robust.

Three dates from layer 3, which may derive from the underlying layer 4, are identified as potential outliers.

One date from layer 8 has a posterior outlier probability of 12%.

None of the other dates are identified as being an outlier at >5% probability.

Differences between the previous and new datasets are minimal.

This suggests that the potential contaminants of the early dates on heated bone were either minimal or of a similar age to the samples themselves.

PARAGRAPH

There is a good consistency in the dates and their stratigraphic position except for the two GrN-dates from layer 3.

The results for the east section are highly consistent.

Both the two dates from layer 11 (Peyrony's layer B) as well as the dates for layer 10 (Peyrony's layer D, “Aurignacian V”) are compatible with each other.

The dates in the east section are all older than the dates for the southeast section, which is in agreement with the correlation between the two sections.

The results for the southeast section are also consistent with the stratigraphy.

The dates for the lower layers 4 to 9 are chronologically separated from those for the upper layers 1 to 3.

Concerning the layers 9 to 4, no outliers are detected.

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

Our results suggest that the 5-m-thick sequence of deposits at Laugerie-Haute Ouest covers the period of approximately 28 to 19 cal.

kBP.

The time taken to accumulate 5 m of sediments is modeled at 8534–10101 years (95.4% probability), leading to an average accumulation rate of about 5–6 cm per century.

Taking into account the evident gap between layers 3 and 4, it suggests that sedimentation rates for layers 11 to 4 were larger than for layer 3 to 1.

It is important to keep the complexity of the site in mind and to emphasize that our results are representative for the LHO sections only and not for the whole Laugerie-Haute site.

PARAGRAPH

The implications of our results are that the stratigraphic integrity of Laugerie-Haute Ouest is greater than suggested by some authors (Delpech, 2012).

Indeed, this new dating reveals a more complex pattern than the previous geological study.

On the one hand, the potential outliers identified in layer 3 give credit to the hypothesis of Texier (2009) of a reworking and mixing of material in the uppermost layers.

These three layers, including the uppermost, Final Solutrean, correspond to Texier's stratified deposit referred to as stone-lobed solifluction sheets (Bertran et al., 1995).

On the other hand, the dating results of the main Solutrean levels (layer 8 to 4) do not indicate substantial mixing of materials of different ages between levels or the formation of pseudo-levels of the same age.

These layers correspond to the massive organic sediment in which Texier recognized a turf-banked solifluction deposit.

This sedimentary process doesn't seem to disturb the stratigraphic succession of the dates.

This could be related to a high sedimentation rate for these layers, as evidenced in contexts where solifluction is the dominant process such as Abri Pataud (Lenoble and Agsous, 2013).

Further, independent testing of the integrity of the site should include systematic refitting of lithic artefacts.

PARAGRAPH

The sequence of dates bracket archaeological levels attributed to periods from the Gravettian to the Magdalenian.

Our results compare well to the existing chronological frameworks for the southwest of France.

The dates for the Gravettian at the base of the LHO sequence (our layer 11) are consistent with ages for a middle to recent Gravettian (Klaric, 2013).

The modeled ages for the Solutrean levels fit in the existing dating framework for the Lower (Early or Ancient) and Upper (Late or Recent) Solutrean in Southwest France (Ducasse, 2012; Renard, 2011).

Dates for layer 8 fall in the Lower Solutrean phase.

Dates for layers 4 and 6 as well as the older modeled ages for layer 3 agree with the Upper Solutrean.

The date for layer 1 (“Lower Magdalenian”) is in line with dating evidence from other Lower Magdalenian sites in the region (Ducasse, 2012; Ducasse and Langlais, 2007).

Overall, the results establish a timeframe for the archaeology of Laugerie-Haute Ouest that further supports the chronological framework for the Upper Paleolithic of Southwest France.

PARAGRAPH

Most significant are the dates for the “Aurignacian V”, the first ones obtained for this cultural facies in Southwestern France.

They are in agreement with those of the so-called Protosolutrean from Portugal (Zilhão et al., 1999; Almeida, 2006).

Ages of c. 25–26 cal.

kBP are in line with the stratigraphy-based chronology of the Protosolutrean (Renard, 2011).

Nevertheless, with a modeled end date of 25.7 cal.

kBP, they cover only a part of the time range of the Portuguese Protosolutrean, that succeeded the final Gravettian at c. 25.8 cal.

kBP and extended to c. 25 cal.

kBP when it was substituted by the Lower Solutrean (Cascalheira and Bicho, 2013; Cascalheira and Bicho, 2015).

At the same time, our dates are statistically indistinct from the recent dates obtained for the Final Gravettian of the Abri Pataud (Henry-Gambier et al., 2013).

This could be read as indicating that only the earlier time of the Aurignacian V is represented at Laugerie-Haute Ouest.

The occurrence of a thick overlying sterile layer (layer 9) dated to ca. 25.2 cal.

kBP, a period where several Protosolutrean sites occur in Portugal (Zilhão et al., 1999; Cascalheira and Bicho, 2013), supports this interpretation.

The question arises then to know if this result applies to Southwestern France as a whole.

While the well-known rarity of Aurignacian V sites in the region does not contradict the assumption of a short presence, further dating evidence is required to corroborate this theory.

Furthermore, a detailed analysis of the lithic assemblages is more than ever needed to unravel the question of the Gravettian-to-Solutrean transition.

SECTION

Conclusions

PARAGRAPH

Our study obtained 38 point provenienced samples (unheated, compact long bone fragments, mostly from reindeer) from Laugerie-Haute Ouest, one of the key sequences for the European Upper Paleolithic, and especially for the Solutrean technocomplex.

The samples and the resulting dates cover the complete sequence at this site.

Our results show that the entire LHO sequence was deposited in a period of 8500–10,000 years, dating between 28 cal.

kBP and 19 cal.

kBP.

The Solutrean levels represent a short time period of perhaps only one millennium.

The Aurignacian V, one of the rare occurrences in Southwest France, dates to the early phase in comparison to the Iberian time range of this phenomenon.

The results conform with stratigraphical integrity of Laugerie-Haute Ouest, support the chronological framework for the Upper Paleolithic and provide a basis for establishing a climatic framework of the Laugerie-Haute Ouest sequence.