10.1016/j.jhep.2019.06.020

ABSTRACT

TITLE

O-GlcNAcylation-dependent upregulation of HO1 triggers ammonia-induced oxidative stress and senescence in hepatic encephalopathy

PARAGRAPH

Cerebral oxidative stress plays an important role in the pathogenesis of hepatic encephalopathy (HE), but the underlying mechanisms are incompletely understood.

Herein, we analyzed a role of heme oxygenase (HO)1, iron and NADPH oxidase 4 (Nox4) for the induction of oxidative stress and senescence in HE.

PARAGRAPH

Gene and protein expression in human post-mortem brain samples was analyzed by gene array and western blot analysis.

Mechanisms and functional consequences of HO1 upregulation were studied in NH4Cl-exposed astrocytes in vitro by western blot, qPCR and super-resolution microscopy.

PARAGRAPH

HO1 and the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress marker grp78 were upregulated, together with changes in the expression of multiple iron metabolism-related genes, in post-mortem brain samples from patients with liver cirrhosis and HE.

NH4Cl elevated HO1 protein and mRNA in cultured astrocytes through glutamine synthetase (GS)-dependent upregulation of glutamine/fructose amidotransferases 1/2 (GFAT1/2), which blocked the transcription of the HO1-targeting miR326-3p in a O-GlcNAcylation dependent manner.

Upregulation of HO1 by NH4Cl triggered ER stress and was associated with elevated levels of free ferrous iron and expression changes in iron metabolism-related genes, which were largely abolished after knockdown or inhibition of GS, GFAT1/2, HO1 or iron chelation.

NH4Cl, glucosamine (GlcN) and inhibition of miR326-3p upregulated Nox4, while knockdown of Nox4, GS, GFAT1/2, HO1 or iron chelation prevented NH4Cl-induced RNA oxidation and astrocyte senescence.

Elevated levels of grp78 and O-GlcNAcylated proteins were also found in brain samples from patients with liver cirrhosis and HE.

PARAGRAPH

The present study identified glucosamine synthesis-dependent protein O-GlcNAcylation as a novel mechanism in the pathogenesis of HE that triggers oxidative and ER stress, as well as senescence, through upregulation of HO1 and Nox4.

