10.1016/j.jhep.2017.11.010

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Macrophage scavenger receptor 1 contributes to pathogenesis of fulminant hepatitis via neutrophil-mediated complement activation

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Fulminant hepatitis (FH) is a rare but potentially fatal disease caused by viral infection or inflammatory destruction of liver tissue.

It is characterized by rapid deterioration of hepatic functions, massive hepatocyte necrosis, and hepatic encephalopathy.1

Despite the recent therapeutic advances, FH is still associated with significant mortality.

Mouse hepatitis virus (MHV) is a positive-strand RNA virus that causes a variety of diseases, including hepatitis, enteritis, and encephalitis in mice.2

Noteworthy, the MHV-induced disease profiles are dependent on the viral strain and infection route, as well as genetic background and immune status of the mice.2,3

Intraperitoneal infection of susceptible strains of mice (i.e. BALB/cJ, C57BL/6) with hepatotropic MHV, such as MHV-3 and MHV-A59, results in sinusoidal thrombosis and hepatocellular necrosis, and thus, has served as a useful model for FH in humans.4,5

PARAGRAPH

Fibrin deposition and thrombosis within the microvasculature is now recognized to play a pivotal role in the hepatocellular injury in experimental and human FH.6,7

Indeed, fibrinogen-like protein 2 (Fgl2) has been shown previously to have serine protease activity capable of directly cleaving prothrombin to thrombin, leading to fibrin deposition.8

In the setting of mice with MHV infection, the induction of Fgl2 was seen in macrophages and endothelial cells in the liver, followed by fibrin deposition and liver necrosis.6

Strikingly, pretreatment with neutralizing antibodies against Fgl2 prevented the coagulation disturbance and hepatic necrosis, thereby reducing mortality in infected mice.9

In addition to Fgl2, accumulating evidence suggests that activation of immune cells and subsequent production of pro-inflammatory cytokines (i.e. tumour necrosis factor-α [TNF-α], interleukin [IL]-1β, IL-6, and interferon-γ [IFN-γ]) play a critical role in the pathogenesis of FH.7,10–12

Moreover, MHV infection causes massive complement activation and elevation of pro-inflammatory complement component 5a (C5a) has been proposed to accelerate the development of FH.7,10

Therefore, understanding the immunological mechanisms of FH will provide opportunities to potentially develop more pervasive and efficient treatment of FH for the benefits of the patients.

PARAGRAPH

The macrophage scavenger receptor 1 (Msr1), also known as scavenger receptor type A (SRA), is preferentially expressed on myeloid cells, such as macrophages and dendritic cells (DCs).13

Recently, Ozment et al. reported that Msr1 is present on circulating and bone marrow neutrophils and was upregulated in response to toll-like receptor 2 stimulation.14

Msr1 acts as an innate pattern recognition receptor capable of recognizing a broad spectrum of “self” and “non-self” ligands, it thereby plays an important role in host defense against foreign microbial infections and the maintenance of immune homeostasis.13

Importantly, emerging studies suggest that Msr1 participates in the pathogenesis of multiple inflammatory diseases and that its immunomodulatory function may be uncoupled from its endocytic/phagocytic activity.15

We previously found that interference of Msr1-mediated regulatory pathways resulted in hypersensitivity of mice to T cell-mediated hepatitis.

Interestingly, transfer of Msr1-positive hepatic mononuclear cells or administration of Msr1 protein could decrease the severity of liver damage.16

However, little is known about the role of Msr1 in the pathogenesis of virus-induced FH.

PARAGRAPH

In this study, we report a strong upregulation of Msr1 in human and murine experimental FH.

Our results showed that Msr1-deficient mice were resistant to MHV-A59-induced FH, which was attributed to the suppressed inflammatory response and limited Fgl2 expression.

Indeed, Msr1 enhanced induction of NETosis and release of neutrophil elastase (NE) from neutrophils upon MHV-A59 challenge.

This promoted serum generation of C5a, which was associated with increased Fgl2 expression and consequent acute liver damage.

Most importantly, Msr1 enhanced MHV-induced phosphorylation of the transforming growth factor-activated kinase 1 (TAK1), thereby facilitating the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) signaling activation for induction of NETosis.

Furthermore, we provided evidence that blockage of Msr1 attenuated the liver damage caused by MHV-A59 infection, suggesting that inhibition of Msr1-mediated inflammatory response may be used as a new immunotherapeutic strategy for the treatment of FH.

SECTION

Materials and methods

SECTION

Patient samples

PARAGRAPH

Paraffin-embedded liver tissues from fulminant liver failure (n = 10) were obtained from patients who were clinically, histologically and pathologically diagnosed for acute viral hepatitis with infection of hepatitis B virus in the Nanfang Hospital affiliated with Southern Medical University.

The normal controls were adjacent liver tissues obtained from patients who underwent surgery for liver cancer (n = 5).

All patients gave informed consent, and the experimental design and study were reviewed and approved by the Ethical Committee of Southern Medical University.

SECTION

Mice and infection

PARAGRAPH

Msr1-deficient (Msr1−/−) mice were obtained from the Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME, USA).

C57BL/6 mice were purchased from the Animal Institute of Southern Medical University (Guangzhou, China).

The animals were maintained under a 12-h light/dark cycle in a specific pathogen-free animal facility at a controlled temperature (20–25 °C) and humidity (50 ± 5%).

All mice were fed with regular diet and autoclaved water.

All animal experiments in this study were approved by the Welfare and Ethical Committee for Experimental Animal Care of Southern Medical University.

PARAGRAPH

Mice (male, 6–8 weeks old) were injected intraperitoneally with 7 × 105 plaque-forming unit (PFU) of MHV-A59 to generate survival curves in wild-type (WT) and Msr1−/− mice.

Administration of 5 × 105 PFU of MHV-A59 was used to assess liver damage and other parameters at different time points.

To deplete liver macrophages, mice were intravenously injected with 200 μl of clodronate-containing liposomes (FormuMax Scientific, Palo Alto, CA, USA).

Alternatively, neutrophil depletion was achieved by injecting 100 µg of anti-mouse lymphocyte antigen 6 complex locus G ([Ly6G] RB6-8C5, eBioscience, San Diego, CA, USA).

In some experiments, WT or Msr1−/− mice were injected intravenously with 1 mg/kg of C5a receptor antagonists (C5aRa) (GL Biochem, Shanghai, China) or injected intraperitoneally with 100 mg/kg of sivelestat (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) 30 mins before MHV-A59 infection.

To block the effect of Msr1, WT mice were injected intraperitoneally with 100 μg of fucoidan (Sigma-Aldrich) simultaneously with MHV-A59 administration.

SECTION

Statistical analysis

PARAGRAPH

The experimental data were evaluated by calculating the mean ± SD.

One-way ANOVA was used for comparisons among multiple groups.

Differences between two groups within experiments were analyzed by Student’s t test.

Comparison of the survival curves was performed using the Log-Rank test.

P values <0.05 were considered statistically significant.

PARAGRAPH

For further details regarding the materials used, please refer to the CTAT table and supplementary information.

SECTION

Results

SECTION

Hepatic expression of Msr1 increases dramatically in human fulminant hepatitis and mouse model of fulminant hepatic failure

PARAGRAPH

Our previous observation of an increased MSR1 expression in the liver from patients with autoimmune hepatitis and chronic type B hepatitis prompted us to assess hepatic MSR1 expression in patients with FH.16

Immunohistochemical staining showed that the level of MSR1 in the liver was highly elevated in patients with fulminant hepatic failure infected by hepatitis B virus (Fig. 1A).

Similarly, hepatic Msr1 expression increased significantly in the liver tissues from a mouse model of MHV-A59 induced fulminant hepatic failure, as indicated by immunohistochemical staining (Fig. 1B) and immunoblotting (Fig. 1C).

We next examined the expression pattern of Msr1 during FH.

Fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) analysis revealed that Msr1 expression was increased on multiple subsets of mononuclear cells in the livers, including the CD11b+ leukocytes, CD11c+ DCs, F4/80+ macrophages and Ly6G+ neutrophils, upon MHV-A59 administration (Fig. 1D).

SECTION

Mice deficient in Msr1 are strongly resistant to MHV-A59 infection

PARAGRAPH

To define the role of Msr1 in virus-induced FH, WT and Msr1−/− mice were injected intraperitoneally with 7×105 PFU of MHV-A59, and the survival rate of mice was observed.

Strikingly, all of the WT mice died within 48 h. However, 80% of Msr1−/− mice survived the challenge (Fig. 2A).

To further assess the effect of Msr1 on liver injury, WT and Msr1−/− mice were infected with 5×105 PFU of MHV-A59, followed by serum and histology analysis at the indicated time points.

The susceptibility of MHV-A59 is same for WT and Msr1−/− mice upon intraperitoneal administration (Fig. S1A and S1B).

Sera collected from MHV-A59-infected Msr1−/− mice showed a lower level of alanine aminotransferase (ALT) activity than those from WT controls (Fig. 2B).

MHV-A59-treated Msr1−/− mice displayed limited hepatocyte necrosis and disseminated hemorrhage compared with those from WT counterparts (Fig. 2C).

Besides, less terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) positive cells were found in the livers of MHV-A59-treated Msr1−/− mice than those from WT mice (Fig. 2D).

PARAGRAPH

Next, we compared the serum levels of inflammatory cytokines between MHV-A59 treated WT and Msr1−/− mice to further determine the role of Msr1 in MHV-A59-induced hepatitis.

Attenuated liver damage in Msr1−/− mice was accompanied by a pronounced reduction of pro-inflammatory cytokines (i.e. TNF-α, IL-6, and IFN-γ) and chemokine monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), whereas increased secretion of the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 in serum (Fig. 2E).

Accordingly, intrahepatic mRNA expression of the pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokine was significantly suppressed in Msr1−/− mice compared with those in WT mice upon MHV-A59 administration (Fig. 2F).

Additionally, the change of IL-10 mRNA was similar to that of protein level in serum between WT and Msr1−/− mice (Fig. 2F).

We then investigated the signaling pathways and found that the phosphorylation of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) and nuclear factor-kappa B P65 was attenuated in Msr1−/− mice at different time points after MHV-A59 treatment (Fig. S2A and S2B).

Collectively, these results indicated a potential role of Msr1 in promoting the pathogenesis of FH.

SECTION

Msr1 controls coagulation and complement activation upon MHV-A59 infection

PARAGRAPH

Hepatic Fgl2, a hallmark protein that causes necrosis of infected livers, is remarkably increased during the development of FH.6

To examine the effects of Msr1 on coagulation, we measured Fgl2 expression in the liver of mice.

Enhanced fgl2 transcript expression was determined by quantitative PCR, and its level in Msr1-deficient liver was lower than that in WT control following MHV-A59 infection (Fig. 3A).

Immunohistochemical staining revealed that livers from virus-infected Msr1−/− mice exhibited less Fgl2 expression than those from WT counterparts (Fig. 3B).

Immunoblotting analysis verified the lower Fgl2 protein level in the livers of Msr1−/− mice, compared to WT littermates following MHV-A59 infection (Fig. 3C).

Consistently, MHV-infected Msr1−/− mice displayed a remarkably decreased Fgl2 level in serum, assessed by ELISA analysis (Fig. 3D).

These data indicate that Msr1 potentiates Fgl2 production and activates coagulation during the pathogenesis of murine viral FH.

PARAGRAPH

A recent study has shown that C5a/C5aR axis-mediated complement activation is responsible for the generation of Fgl2 during FH.10

Therefore, we measured the C5a production in mice upon MHV-A59 infection.

As expected, MHV-A59 challenge led to a rapid increase in serum levels of C5a in both WT and Msr1−/− mice.

C5a production was significantly suppressed in Msr1−/− mice compared with those in WT mice after MHV-A59 treatment (Fig. 3E).

In agreement with this observation, Msr1 deficiency led to a significantly reduced C5a level in liver from MHV-A59-infected mice (Fig. 3F).

Additionally, immunohistochemical staining and immunoblotting analysis showed that the level of hepatic C5aR was comparable between virus-infected WT and Msr1−/− mice (Fig. S3A, B).

Together, these results suggested that the complement cascade was less active in MHV-A59-infected Msr1−/− mice than in WT mice.

SECTION

Blockade of C5a/C5aR pathway eliminates the difference in liver damage between virus-infected WT and Msr1−/− mice

PARAGRAPH

To further investigate the role of complement activation in function of Msr1 during FH, WT and Msr1−/− mice were pretreated with C5aRa or normal saline via intravenous injection before MHV-A59 administration.

The severity of liver damage was comparable between MHV-A59-injected WT and Msr1−/− mice upon C5aR blockade (Fig. 4A).

The sera from WT and Msr1−/− mice also showed no significant difference in the levels of ALT activity (Fig. 4B).

Hepatic Fgl2 expression was similar between MHV-A59-challenged WT and Msr1−/− mice upon interruption of C5a/C5aR pathway (Fig. 4C).

Our data also showed that both WT and Msr1−/− mice displayed substantially reduced production of pro-inflammatory cytokines in the absence of C5aR signals.

Moreover, the levels of the cytokines were comparable between MHV-A59-infected WT and Msr1−/− mice when C5a/C5aR pathway was blocked (Fig. 4D).

These data suggest that Msr1 modulates Fgl2 expression and the development of murine FH through enhancing activation of the C5a/C5aR pathway and production of C5a.

SECTION

Neutrophils from WT mice generate more C5a than those from Msr1−/− mice after MHV-A59 challenge

PARAGRAPH

The previous study demonstrated that phagocytic cells (i.e. macrophages and neutrophils) are able to cleave C5 into biologically active C5a.17

FACS analysis showed the infiltration of various subsets of mononuclear cells (i.e. CD11b+ leukocytes, CD11c+ DCs, F4/80+ macrophages and Ly6G+ neutrophils) into livers was comparable between WT and Msr1−/− mice upon MHV-A59 administration (Fig. S4).

Given that Msr1 is expressed primarily on such cells,13,14 we raised the question of which cell-associated Msr1 modulated the generation of C5a.

Clodronate liposomes were employed to deplete the macrophage population in vivo (Fig. S5), and anti-Ly6G antibodies were chosen to deplete neutrophils in mice (Fig. S6).

The MHV-A59-induced liver damage was lessened in Msr1−/− mice in comparison with WT mice, treated with either clodronate liposomes or control liposomes, as indicated by reduced hepatic necrosis, ALT activity, C5a production and serum Fgl2 production (Fig. 5A, B).

By contrast, depletion of neutrophils abolished the difference in liver damage between MHV-A59-infected WT and Msr1−/− mice.

No significant difference in liver pathology was observed between virus-treated WT and Msr1−/− mice after neutrophil depletion (Fig. 5C).

Also, serum ALT activity and the serum levels of C5a and Fgl2 were comparable between virus-treated WT and Msr1−/− mice when neutrophils were depleted in vivo (Fig. 5D).

Interestingly, the expression of Msr1 in neutrophils was upregulated upon MHV-A59 stimulation in vitro determined by immunoblotting, suggesting that Msr1 may affect the function of neutrophils (Fig. S7).

Furthermore, we evaluated the complement activation induced by neutrophils in response to MHV infection.

Neutrophils isolated from MHV-infected WT mice were significantly more potent than those from MHV-infected Msr1−/− mice in cleaving C5 into C5a (Fig. 5E).

Additionally, WT neutrophils had a stronger capability to cleave C5 than Msr1−/− neutrophils upon MHV-A59 stimulation in vitro (Fig. 5F).

Taken together, these findings indicated that Msr1-positive neutrophils were accountable for the pathogenesis of FH.

SECTION

Augmented NETosis and increased neutrophil elastase are closely associated with Msr1-mediated regulation of FH progression

PARAGRAPH

It has been reported that neutrophils have a distinct antimicrobial mechanism to trap and kill pathogens, which are so-called neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs).18

The release of NETs is the result of a specialized form of neutrophil death, dubbed NETosis.18,19

Here, we assessed the ability of MHV-A59 to induce NETosis in isolated murine neutrophils using the cell-impermeable DNA dye SYTOX green.

Notably, more NETosis occurred in WT neutrophils compared to Msr1−/− neutrophils upon MHV-A59 stimulation (Fig. 6A).

We also examined the NETs formed by WT and Msr1−/− neutrophils upon MHV-A59 stimulation using an immunofluorescence approach that showed colocalization of NETs components, myeloperoxidase (MPO) and NE.

As shown in Fig. 6B, WT neutrophils produced many more NETs than Msr1−/− neutrophils after virus treatment.

During NETosis, the serine protease NE is present on NETs released from activated neutrophils, which plays a crucial role in host defense.20

We observed an excessive amount of NE released from WT neutrophils compared to Msr1−/− neutrophils after MHV-A59 stimulation in vitro (Fig. 6C).

Strikingly, much higher activity of NE was shown in the serum from MHV-infected WT mice than that from MHV-infected Msr1−/− mice (Fig. 6D).

To further validate the function of NE in the Msr1-mediated regulation of the pathogenesis of FH, WT and Msr1−/− mice were treated with a NE inhibitor, sivelestat, before MHV-A59 infection, followed by histological and serum analysis.

The severity of liver damage was comparable between WT and Msr1−/− mice after sivelestat treatment (Fig. 6E).

Additionally, the sera collected from WT and Msr1−/− mice showed no significant difference in the levels of ALT activity and the productions of C5a and Fgl2 (Fig. 6F).

These data suggest that Msr1 aggravated the pathogenesis of virus-induced FH by promoting neutrophils towards NETosis and release of NE.

SECTION

TAK1 is involved in Msr1-enhanced NETosis formation upon MHV-A59 stimulation

PARAGRAPH

Given the previously reported endocytic activity of Msr1,13 we first determined the potential impact of Msr1 on receptor-mediated endocytosis of MHV-A59.

FACS analysis showed that WT and Msr1−/− neutrophils exhibited similar fluorescence after incubation with fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-labeled MHV-A59 (Fig. S8), indicating that Msr1 might serve as an immune modulator rather than endocytic/phagocytic receptor in the pathogenesis of FH.

Recent evidence supports involvement of the Raf-ERK pathway in NETosis formation.21

To provide insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying Msr1-mediated immunoregulation, we investigated the activation of ERK pathways in WT and Msr1−/− neutrophils after MHV stimulation.

The increased phosphorylation of ERK was shown in MHV-A59-stimulated WT neutrophils compared to Msr1−/− counterparts (Fig. 7A).

Additionally, we also examined the type I interferon response in neutrophils during MHV stimulation.

Both phosphorylation of interferon regulatory transcription factors, IRF3 and IRF7, as well as production of IFN-α was similar between WT and Msr1−/− neutrophils after MHV-A59 treatment (Fig. S9).

Furthermore, pretreatment with ERK inhibitor, U0126, substantially reduced formation of NETosis in both WT and Msr1−/− neutrophils.

Moreover, the formation of NETosis was comparable between MHV-A59-treated WT and Msr1−/− neutrophils in these two groups when the ERK pathway was inhibited (Fig. 7B).

PARAGRAPH

TAK1 is a known activator of MAPK signaling pathways in various immune cells, including neutrophils, and was also reported to act upstream of ERK.22

Therefore, we examined the possibility that TAK1 is involved in Msr1-mediated regulation of NETosis formation.

Upon MHV-A59 stimulation, WT neutrophils displayed higher levels of TAK1 phosphorylation compared with Msr1−/− cells (Fig. 7C).

Next, WT and Msr1−/− neutrophils were stimulated by MHV-A59 in the presence or absence of the TAK1 inhibitor, LL Z1640-2.

First, we confirmed that LL Z1640-2 was able to inhibit TAK1 phosphorylation (Fig. 7D).

Additionally, MHV-A59 induced ERK phosphorylation was suppressed by pretreatment of the TAK1 inhibitor under the same conditions, indicating that TAK1 activation is required for ERK activation after MHV stimulation (Fig. 7D).

Notably, the formation of NETosis and activity of released NE were comparable in MHV-A59-infected WT and Msr1−/− neutrophils upon TAK1 inhibition (Fig. 7E, F).

Together, these data suggest that Msr1 enhances TAK1 phosphorylation upon MHV-A59 stimulation, which results in activation of the ERK pathway and consequent NETosis formation.

SECTION

Blockade of Msr1 ameliorates MHV-A59-induced hepatic injury and complement activation

PARAGRAPH

To directly examine the potential effect of Msr1 in FH, WT mice were intraperitoneally injected with a pharmacological inhibitor of Msr1, fucoidan,23 simultaneously with MHV-A59 infection.

In vivo injection of fucoidan was able to significantly prolong the survival of the virus-infected WT mice (Fig. 8A).

Mice receiving fucoidan showed marked reduction of liver injury, as evidenced by reduced serum ALT levels (Fig. 8B) and hepatic pathology (Fig. 8C).

Moreover, fucoidan inhibited the production of serum C5a upon MHV-A59 infection (Fig. 8D).

Taking together, we conclude that the Msr1 plays a decisive role in regulating neutrophil-mediated complement activation, and thereby affects the severity of liver pathology and animal mortality during MHV infection.

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

Msr1 exerts systemic effects in a variety of diseases, including atherosclerosis, sepsis, endotoxemia, and viral infections.24

In this study, we used a mouse FH model induced by MHV-A59 infection to investigate the effects of Msr1 in this disease process.

We demonstrate that Msr1 acts as an accelerator in MHV-induced inflammatory response.

The alleviated disease observed in infected Msr1−/− mice is associated with a substantial decrease in the production of Fgl2 and C5a, which are critical for the initiation of FH pathogenesis.

Our results have revealed that the exacerbated effect of Msr1 on MHV-induced FH relies on the neutrophil activity.

Moreover, we have provided the evidence that Msr1 promotes neutrophil NETosis triggered by MHV-A59 infection, enhancing the release of NE and the production of C5a, which further accelerates the pathogenesis of virus-induced FH.

PARAGRAPH

Systemic inflammatory response syndrome has long been considered as an essential element in patients with fulminant hepatic failure.25

The clinical syndrome is mediated by the release of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines into the systemic circulation from the liver.

Subsequently, the accumulation of pro-inflammatory substances results in exacerbation of injury to the liver and other organs.

The previous report showed that Msr1 has a regulatory function in cytokine production upon microbe infection.

Msr1 potentiates the inflammatory response mediated by toll-like receptor 3 that is located in endomembranes by mediating pathogen internalization.26

Alternatively, some studies suggested that macrophage-expressed Msr1 may limit pro-inflammatory cytokine production in response to mycobacteria, unrelated to its activity in pathogen phagocytosis.27,28

Therefore, regulation of Msr1 expression may be important for its functions under certain pathogenic conditions.

Here, we demonstrate that Msr1 facilitates the pro-inflammatory cytokines in a mouse model of FH induced by MHV-A59 infection.

Notably, Msr1-mediated increases in the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines upon MHV-A59 challenge is dependent on the induction of C5a/C5aR pathway because blockade of C5aR signaling abrogates the detrimental effect of Msr1 on viral FH.

C5a is an active inflammatory component that initiates pro-inflammatory responses and activates numerous host immune effector cells, including macrophages, neutrophils and other immune cells.29,30

Our study shows dramatically increased serum C5a levels at the very early stage of virus-induced FH, in line with the previous report,10 indicating that C5a is an early mediator of the disease.

Meanwhile, virus-infected Msr1−/− mice display limited serum C5a levels compared to WT controls.

Attenuation of FH in Msr1−/− mice correlates with decreased activation of MAPKs pathways and reduced induction of Fgl2, which are known major contributors to the pathogenesis of FH and can be induced by C5a stimulation.7,9,10,31

These data suggest that Msr1-facilitated production of C5a plays a crucial role in the development of FH.

PARAGRAPH

Generally, conversion of C5 to C5a requires prior activation of complement component 3 (C3).32

However, the previous study showed that the attenuation of susceptibility to viral FH in C3-deficient mice was much milder compared with the C5aR-deficient mice, indicating that the generation of C5a is at least partially independent on C3 activation in the development of FH.10

Huber-Lang et al. showed that activated phagocytic cells (i.e. macrophages and neutrophils) can generate C5a from C5.17

In agreement with this observation, we have found that hepatic neutrophils can cleave C5 into C5a in vitro after MHV-A59 stimulation, which is also supported by a previous report that NE released from activated neutrophil has C5 convertase (C5a-generating) activity.33

The intriguing function of Msr1 in neutrophil-mediated C5a generation was also supported by our in vivo cell depletion study.

Additionally, neutrophils from infected WT mice cleave more C5 to C5a compared with Msr1−/− mice, whereas there was no difference in phagocytic activity between WT and Msr1−/− neutrophils.

Experimental evidence suggests that neutrophils might play a critical role in the pathogenesis of acute liver failure by contributing to the initiation and perpetuation of immune dysregulation through the formation of NETs, synthesis of pro-inflammatory cytokines and direct liver damage.34,35

In the context of viral infection, neutrophils undergo NETosis, a novel type of programmed cell death, and release NETs.35

Our current work demonstrates that Msr1 promotes the NETosis in neutrophils upon MHV stimulation, whereas Liao et al. reported that expression of Msr1 conferred resistance of macrophages to the apoptotic stimulation by oxLDL and its cytotoxic lipid component.36

These two seemingly distinct aspects of Msr1 activity are probably indications of its functional flexibility in mediating differential cellular events.

Msr1 expressed on differential cells may adapt to specific cellular needs in response to different types of stimulus.

PARAGRAPH

NETs are described as an antimicrobial mechanism, based on the fact that NETs allow neutrophils to deliver high concentrations of cytotoxic agents (i.e. reactive oxygen species, antimicrobial peptides, and proteases such as cathepsin G, NE and proteinase 3) that degrade virulence factors and kill bacteria extracellularly.18,35

Recent findings indicate the importance of neutrophil serine proteases as key mediators of inflammatory processes in neutrophil-mediated tissue injury.18,20

Massberg et al. demonstrated that neutrophil serine proteases in concert with externalized nucleosomes initiate coagulation as a host defense mechanism.37

Neutrophil initiated coagulation is probably the result of a complement-dependent mechanism, as shown by Pagano et al.38 for the development of the elastase-induced abdominal aortic aneurysm.

Moreover, neutrophil serine proteases operate as important activators of TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-18 to enhance the immune response.39

Takai et al.40 reported that NE contributes to the early step of the inflammatory cascade in acute viral hepatitis and NE inhibitor reduces the expression of inflammatory cytokines and chemokines in the liver, attenuating liver injury in hepatitis B transgenic mice.

In agreement with these reports, our finding of Msr1-increased hypersensitivity to FH correlates with excessive NETosis and subsequently a high release of NE.

Therefore, the discrepancy in the severity of FH in WT and Msr1–/− mice may be attributed to the different levels of NETosis induced in neutrophils upon MHV-A59 administration.

PARAGRAPH

A recent study showed that the Raf-ERK pathway is involved in NETosis induction through activation of NADPH oxidase and upregulation of anti-apoptotic proteins.21

TAK1 can be linked to ERK pathway in human neutrophils.40

Here, we report for the first time, as far as we know, that TAK1 is involved in ERK activation and subsequent NETosis induction in the pathogenesis of FH.

Furthermore, Msr1 contributes to TAK1 activation, which therefore delivers a signal for NET formation.

A recent study revealed that cross-linking of FcγRIIIb activates TAK1 and triggers the ERK signaling pathway, leading to induction of NETosis.22

This study also indicates that spleen tyrosine kinase (Syk) is required for TAK1 activation and subsequent NET formation after FcγRIIIb engagement.22

Notably, the activation of Syk family kinases occurs after the crosslink of activating FcγRs with Src family kinases, such as Fyn, Lck, or Lyn.41

Miki et al. demonstrated that Msr1 directly interacts with Lyn kinase,42 and the engagement of Msr1 also caused the activation of both Lyn and phosphoinositide 3-kinase.43

It is possible that Msr1 modulates MHV infection-induced TAK1 phosphorylation by regulating the sequential activation of Lyn and Syk kinases.

Indeed, FcγRIIIb expressed in monocytes/macrophages exhibits scavenger receptor-like function and has been implicated in inflammatory processes associated with atherosclerosis.44

Taken together, we postulate that the co-expression of Msr1 with FcγRIIIb on inflammatory cells may be functionally complementary to each other, via Src family kinases, modulating the pro-inflammatory responses and subsequent progression of diseases.

PARAGRAPH

In summary, our data elucidate an important feature of Msr1 in the exacerbation of mouse viral FH, suggesting that interference of MSR1-mediated regulatory pathways may be a potential therapeutic strategy for patients with FH.

Moreover, our findings substantiate a concept that increased Msr1 expression on neutrophils leads to over-activation of the complement system during infection.

SECTION

Financial support

PARAGRAPH

This work was supported in part by Foundation for Distinguished Young Teacher in Higher Education of Guangdong (grant no.: Yq2013034), National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant nos.: 31370875 and 81671568), Science and Technology Planning Project of Guangdong Province (grant no.: 2016A020215106), Science and Technology Planning Project of Guangzhou (grant no.: 201607010195), and National Institutes of Health Grants CA175033.

SECTION

Conflict of interest

PARAGRAPH

The authors declare no conflicts of interest that pertain to this work.

PARAGRAPH

Please refer to the accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.

SECTION

Authors contributions

PARAGRAPH

DZ, XYW, JH and ZC designed research.

YT, HL, JL, Yanli Li, Yunzhi Liu, Jia Zhou, Jing Zhou, and XL performed experiments.

YT, Jia Zhou, WZ, JH, ZC, XYW, and DZ analyzed data.

DZ, ZC, and XYW wrote the manuscript.