10.1016/j.jhep.2019.09.033

ABSTRACT

TITLE

PSMP/MSMP promotes hepatic fibrosis through CCR2 and represents a novel therapeutic target

PARAGRAPH

C-C motif chemokine receptor 2 (CCR2) has been recognized as a promising target for the treatment of liver fibrosis.

PC3-secreted microprotein (PSMP)/microseminoprotein (MSMP) is a novel chemotactic cytokine and its receptor is CCR2.

In the present study we investigated the expression and role of PSMP in liver fibrosis/cirrhosis.

PARAGRAPH

PSMP expression was studied in patients with fibrosis/cirrhosis and in 3 murine models of liver fibrosis, including mice treated with carbon tetrachloride (CCl4), bile-duct ligation, or a 5-diethoxycarbonyl-1,4-dihydrocollidine diet.

The role of PSMP was evaluated in Psmp-/- mice and after treatment with a PSMP antibody in wild-type mice.

The direct effects of PSMP on macrophages and hepatic stellate cells were studied in vitro.

PARAGRAPH

In this study, we found that PSMP was highly expressed in fibrotic/cirrhotic tissues from patients with different etiologies of liver disease and in the 3 experimental mouse models of fibrosis.

Damage-associated molecular pattern molecules HMGB-1 and IL-33 induced hepatocytes to produce PSMP.

PSMP deficiency resulted in a marked amelioration of hepatic injury and fibrosis.

In CCl4-induced hepatic injury, the infiltration of macrophages and CCR2+ monocytes into the liver was significantly decreased in Psmp-/- mice.

Consistent with the decreased levels of intrahepatic macrophages, proinflammatory cytokines were significantly reduced.

Moreover, adeno-associated virus-8 vectors successfully overexpressing human PSMP in Psmp-/- mouse livers could reverse the attenuation of liver injury and fibrosis induced by CCl4 in a CCR2-dependent manner.

Treatment with a specific PSMP-neutralizing antibody, 3D5, prevented liver injury and fibrosis induced by CCl4 in mice.

At the cellular level, PSMP directly promoted M1 polarization of macrophages and activation of LX-2 cells.

PARAGRAPH

PSMP enhances liver fibrosis through its receptor, CCR2.

PSMP is a potentially attractive therapeutic target for the treatment of patients with liver fibrosis.

