10.1016/j.jhep.2019.11.013

ABSTRACT

TITLE

Interleukin-22 ameliorates acute-on-chronic liver failure by reprogramming of impaired regeneration pathways in mice

PARAGRAPH

Acute-on-chronic liver failure (ACLF) is a clinical syndrome defined by liver failure on preexisting chronic liver disease and is often associated with bacterial infection with high short-term mortality.

Experimental models that fully reproduce ACLF and effective pharmacological therapies are lacking.

PARAGRAPH

To mimic ACLF conditions, we developed a severe liver injury model by combining chronic injury (chronic carbon tetrachloride [CCl4] injection), acute hepatic insult (injection of a double dose CCl4), and bacterial infection (intraperitoneal injection of bacteria).

Serum and liver samples from patients with ACLF or acute drug-induced liver injury (DILI) were used.

Liver injury and regeneration were assessed to ascertain for potential benefits of interleukin-22 (IL-22Fc) administration.

PARAGRAPH

This severe liver injury model developed acute-on-chronic liver injury, bacterial infection, multi-organ injury, and high mortality, recapitulating some features of clinical ACLF.

Liver regeneration in this model was severely impaired due to the shift from the activation of pro-regenerative IL-6/STAT3 to anti-regenerative IFN-γ/STAT1 pathway.

The impaired IL-6/STAT3 activation was due to Kupffer cell inability to produce IL-6; whereas the enhanced STAT1 activation was due to strong innate immune response and subsequent production of IFN-γ.

Compared to DILI patients, ACLF patients had higher levels of IFN-γ but lower liver regeneration.

IL-22Fc treatment improved survival of the ACLF mice by reversing the STAT1/STAT3 pathway imbalance and enhancing expression of many anti-bacterial genes in a manner involving the anti-apoptotic protein BCL2.

PARAGRAPH

Acute-on-chronic liver injury or bacterial infection is associated with impaired liver regeneration due to a shift from the pro-regenerative to anti-regenerative pathways, IL-22Fc therapy reverses this shift and attenuates bacterial infection, thus IL-22Fc may have therapeutic potential for ACLF treatment.

