10.1016/j.jhep.2018.08.005

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Clinical and histologic features of adults with alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency in a non-cirrhotic cohort

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (AATD) is an inherited cause of liver disease in adults and children.

The underlying genetic change is a point mutation in the serine protease inhibitor alpha-1-antitrypsin.1

In the classic form of AATD, affected individuals are homozygous for the Z allele (ZZ), where a Glu342Lys substitution leads to a misfolded protein.

The resulting protein conformation alpha-1 antitrypsin Z (ATZ) favors retention and subsequent polymerization within the hepatocyte endoplasmic reticulum (ER).2

These polymers form the PAS-positive inclusions that are the hallmark of AATD liver disease on biopsy.

Accumulation of ATZ within the ER leads to activation of intracellular disposal mechanisms for misfolded proteins and clearance from hepatocytes.3

Insufficient clearance of ATZ leads to further polymerization and retention, which is widely accepted as the cause of liver disease.

Experimentally, hepatocytes with the highest burden of ATZ retention and accumulation are the most susceptible to injury and cell death.4

Conversely, blocking production and/or buildup of ATZ leads to reversal of liver injury in disease models.5,6

PARAGRAPH

The natural history of AATD is not well defined, and clinical liver disease may appear at any age.7,8

Cirrhosis remains a significant cause of mortality and is more commonly an indication for liver transplantation in adults with AATD than children.9–12

A Swedish newborn screening cohort reported only 10% of ZZ children developed clinically significant liver disease in the first few years of life.13

This cohort has been followed for approximately 40 years.

Since age 18, mild elevations in aminotransferases were seen in 5%, and cirrhosis was not evident clinically.14–16

Other populations studied provide estimates of cirrhosis and liver disease prevalence.

The results vary widely, ranging from 2–63%, and in some studies, the risk increases with age >50 and male gender.10,17–22

Reasons for the variability are many: selection and detection bias introduced by the retrospective nature of the work, differences in definitions of liver disease and patient populations, diagnosis ascertainment, and lack of confirmatory histology.

PARAGRAPH

Therefore, we sought to prospectively describe the prevalence and severity of liver fibrosis confirmed by liver biopsy.

We hypothesize that a spectrum of ATZ accumulation and fibrosis is present, and that identifying those with early stages of liver fibrosis may predict who is at risk of progressive disease.

Secondary aims of the study include measuring performance characteristics of non-invasive methods to detect fibrosis and identifying clinical risk factors for liver disease.

SECTION

Patients and methods

PARAGRAPH

A prospective study was designed to perform liver biopsies in a well characterized cross section of adults with AATD.

ZZ individuals confirmed by genetic testing who were age 21–71, from the US or Canada, and willing to consent to a liver biopsy were eligible.

Decompensated liver disease (ascites, variceal bleeding, hepatic encephalopathy, hepatocellular carcinoma) was excluded.

Recipients of a liver or lung transplant were excluded.

All patients gave informed, written consent prior to enrolling.

The study was approved by the University of Florida institutional IRB and is listed at clincaltrials.gov (NCT01810458).

All authors had access to the study data and reviewed and approved the final manuscript.

SECTION

Patient recruitment

PARAGRAPH

Patients were recruited by three mechanisms: AATD patient registries, AATD patient outreach events, and clinical practice at UF.

Eligible and unique individuals in two different patient registries (Alpha-1 Foundation DNA and Tissue Bank at the University of Florida and the Alpha-1 Foundation Research Registry, at the Medical University of South Carolina), were sent a letter describing the study and invited to participate.

These national research registries are a confidential databases established with the purpose to promote research initiatives in AATD.

It is estimated that over 2,500 severely deficient (PI*ZZ or PI*SZ) individuals participate in the national registry.

SECTION

Study procedures

PARAGRAPH

At screening, a medical and environmental exposure history and physical exam were completed.

Waist circumference was measured in a standing position at the level of the umbilicus.

Alcohol use disorders were screened for using the AUDIT questionnaire.23

A score of 8 or higher was used as a cut-off for identification of potentially hazardous drinking.

Alcohol consumption was also estimated in grams per day using 14 g of alcohol per standard drink.

Lab testing confirmed absence of other diseases including viral hepatitis, autoimmune disorders, and HIV.

All clinical tests were determined by standard laboratory procedure by UF Health Medical Laboratories.

APRI and FIB4 indices were calculated.

Pulmonary function tests were completed according the ATS guidelines.

Individuals were classified as having metabolic syndrome based on current consensus guidelines.24

SECTION

Liver histology

PARAGRAPH

A percutaneous liver biopsy was performed with a 16 gauge BioPince™ core biopsy needle after using ultrasonography to mark the location.

The sample was fixed in formalin and processed for examination.

Stains included H&E, trichrome, PAS/PAS + D and Prussian blue.

Two pathologists (C.L., A.C.) scored each biopsy for fibrosis using METAVIR stages F0-F4.

Clinically significant fibrosis was defined as stage ≥F2.

PAS-positive, diastase-resistant (PAS + D) staining and immunohistochemistry (IHC) identified ATZ accumulation.

PAS + D globules present in a high power field were scored from 0–3 as follows: 0-None, 1-Rare: <5 hepatocytes with globules, 2-Few: 5–20 hepatocytes with globules, 3-Numerous: ≥20 hepatocytes with globules.

Portal inflammation and hepatocyte degeneration were noted.

The presence of definite non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) was based on pathologist interpretation of hepatocyte ballooning, lobular inflammation, and steatosis.25

SECTION

Vibration controlled transient elastography

PARAGRAPH

Liver stiffness measurements (LSM) were performed by using FibroScan device powered by vibration controlled transient elastography (VCTE) (Echosens).

The conventional standard M probe or the XL probe was used when appropriate.

Two individuals (T.K. and V.C.) performed the procedure after training on proper technique.

LSM were considered reliable if the following three criteria were met: at least 10 valid measurements, ≥60% success rate, IQR/median ≤30%.26

SECTION

Statistical analysis

PARAGRAPH

Descriptive statistics using continuous variables are shown as means ± standard deviations or medians with range.

Categorical variables are shown as counts and percentages.

Two sample comparisons were performed using Mann-Whitney U testing.

Univariate and forward stepwise multiple logistic regression analysis of clinical factors associated with liver fibrosis were conducted as the primary analysis.

SAS 9.4 was used for logistic regression.

PARAGRAPH

Diagnostic performance of non-invasive measurements for fibrosis stage ≥F2 and ≥F3 were evaluated by estimating the sensitivity and specificity for each individual measurement and calculating AUC.

Optimal cut-off values were established by calculating the Youden’s index for all measurements.

Positive and negative predictive values were assessed for measurements maximizing sensitivity, specificity and Youden’s index.

Diagnostic performance data was assessed using Graphpad Prism 6.1.

Because of the descriptive nature of the study and lack of prior knowledge of effect sizes, variances, and covariances, power analysis was not feasible.

SECTION

Results

SECTION

Study population

SECTION

Patient characteristics

PARAGRAPH

From November 2013 to March 2016, we enrolled n = 99 PI*ZZ adults aged 25–71 from across the US and Canada.

Liver tissue was collected in n = 94 individuals.

The five individuals in whom a sample could not be collected were excluded from analysis.

Demographic and clinical characteristics are shown in Table 1.

In general, this is an older adult population with an established history of AATD.

All participants were Caucasian.

A total of 11% had a family history of AATD liver disease in 11% and 16% reported neonatal jaundice.

Features of the metabolic syndrome were common, including obesity (24.5%) and hypertension (59.6%).

A portion of the cohort had an aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), or gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT) ≥ upper limit of normal (12.7, 11.7, and 12.7%, respectively).

The mean values fall within normal limits as shown (Table 1).

However, AST, ALT, and GGT were significantly higher in the group with fibrosis stage ≥2 (Fig. 1).

No concomitant viral hepatitis, autoimmune hepatitis, iron overload, or cholestatic liver diseases were identified.

SECTION

Tobacco and alcohol use

PARAGRAPH

A history of smoking was common (53.2%) with a mean pack/year history of 9.4 ± 14.

No active smoking reported.

Overall, 76.6% reported consumption of alcohol at low risk levels with estimated average use of 10 ± 16 g/day for males and 6 ± 10 g/day for females.

AUDIT questionnaire scores identified 4.3% (n = 4) of the cohort had potentially hazardous drinking habits, but no one had alcohol dependence.

Alcohol use above the current US recommended allowance of 28 g/day for men and 14 g/day for females occurred in 10.6% (n = 10).

Alcohol consumption was not higher in individuals with increases in AST, ALT, or GGT.

Alcohol use was not associated with clinically significant fibrosis on biopsy (p = 0.8).

SECTION

Pulmonary and liver disease overlap in patients with AATD

PARAGRAPH

The mean baseline forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) was 2 ± 1 liters and 63% (±28) predicted FEV1, which is considered moderate chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).

No statistically significant relationship between the presence of liver fibrosis and severity of COPD measured by % predicted FEV1 or COPD stage was found (Table 1).

The largest proportion of the cohort had mild to moderate lung impairment by lung function testing and limited liver fibrosis (Fig. 2).

A subset of the population (17%) is affected by both severe lung disease and clinically significant liver fibrosis, which is contrary to reports that liver and lung disease do not overlap.

Of the study population, 64.9% were on augmentation therapy, which is the only treatment specific for AATD.

SECTION

Diagnosis ascertainment

PARAGRAPH

At present, no widespread screening program for AATD exists in the US.

In this cohort, pulmonary symptoms (60.6%, n = 57), family screening (33%, n = 31), direct to consumer genetic testing (3.2%, n = 3), or liver test abnormalities (3.2%, n = 3) led to the diagnosis.

Symptoms were present for an average of 4.5 years prior to diagnosis.

AATD individuals identified by family screening had a better % predicted FEV1 (91%) than those with both liver and lung symptoms (80%) and those with only lung symptoms (56%) (p = 0.002).

Individuals who were identified as ZZ because of liver disease were diagnosed at age 8 months, 38 years, and 65 years of age.

None were cirrhotic at the time of diagnosis or at inclusion in the study.

No effect of diagnosis ascertainment was found for presence of liver disease.

SECTION

Liver disease

SECTION

Liver fibrosis and histopathology

PARAGRAPH

The prevalence of clinically significant liver fibrosis was 35.1% (n = 33).

Individual fibrosis stages were F0 = 27.7% (n = 26), F1 = 37.2% (n = 35), F2 = 28.7% (n = 27), F3 = 6.4% (n = 6).

The biopsy size was considered adequate for evaluation with a mean size of 18 ± 4.3 mm.

The other biopsy findings summarized (Table 2) confirm previous case series and autopsy reports:10,22,27 presence of PAS + D inclusions in zone 1, mild portal inflammation, and steatosis.

Despite a high prevalence of steatosis, definite NASH (and NAS ≥5) was only present in one biopsy.

SECTION

Hepatocyte burden of ATZ

PARAGRAPH

In experimental models, hepatocytes with the highest burden of ATZ accumulation are most susceptible to injury.4

We report a simple, novel, semi-quantitative method for describing hepatocyte burden of ATZ (Table 2 and Fig. 3A).

The highest level of accumulation was found in 24.5% of biopsies while 51% of biopsies had fewer than five hepatocytes with detectable ATZ by PAS + D per high power field.

However, IHC staining showed evidence of aggregated ATZ in all but one individual.

The relatively low globule burden suggests that intracellular mechanisms for ATZ disposal are sufficient to prevent accumulation in some patients.

PARAGRAPH

In addition, the concept of a “toxic gain of function” was explored by evaluating the relationship between PAS + D accumulation and fibrosis.

Individuals with ≥F2 had higher PAS + D scores (2.3 ± 0.77 vs. 1.4 ± 0.82, p <0.0001).

Proportionately, overall accumulation of PAS + D increases as the stage of fibrosis progresses (Fig. 3B).

However, 31% of individuals with a low fibrosis score had significant PAS + D accumulation (Fig. 3B, box).

Together these data suggest that ATZ accumulation may precede chronic portal inflammation and the development of liver fibrosis.

Furthermore, this supports the hypothesis that AATD individuals with low fibrosis and significant PAS + D accumulation represent a population at risk of future fibrosis development.

SECTION

Risk factors for liver disease

PARAGRAPH

Previously reported clinical risk factors for liver disease were evaluated in a stepwise fashion for their relationship to fibrosis.

In the univariate analysis, sex (p = 0.04), diabetes (p = 0.002), impaired fasting glucose (p = 0.003), obesity (p = 0.01), and metabolic syndrome (p <0.001) were all significant.

Metabolic syndrome was the most significant univariate predictor and was selected to enter forward stepwise analysis first.

The remaining covariates had prognostic value for detecting fibrosis when collectively evaluated and adjusting for metabolic syndrome (p = 0.03).

However, no single variable remained significant when adjusted for metabolic syndrome, although male sex was close (p = 0.07).

The estimated odds ratio for advanced fibrosis in the presence of metabolic syndrome was 14.2 (95% CI 3.7–55; p <0.001).

Of those with metabolic syndrome, 82% had significant fibrosis compared with 25% with limited fibrosis.

PARAGRAPH

After the association between metabolic syndrome and fibrosis was identified, additional analysis was completed to further characterize the relationship between metabolic syndrome, histologic findings, and fibrosis.

In Table 3, portal and lobular inflammation, hepatocellular degeneration, and PAS + D accumulation remain associated with fibrosis after adjustment for metabolic syndrome.

Steatosis was not independently predictive of fibrosis.

In addition, a stepwise forward regression analysis was performed to determine if other histologic features were predictive of metabolic syndrome after adjusting for fibrosis stage.

The univariate analysis revealed portal inflammation (OR 12.7; 95% CI 1.6–100; p <0.003), hepatocyte degeneration (OR 5.9; 95% CI 1.75–19.9; p = 0.002), PAS + D accumulation in >5 hepatocytes (OR 11.1; 95% CI 2.38–52.1; p <0.001), in >20 hepatocytes (OR 7.03; 2.26–21.9; p <0.001), in Zones 1 and 2 (OR 6.72; 95% CI 2.07–21.8; p <0.001), and steatosis (OR 8.64; 95% CI 2.28–32.7; p <0.001) associated with metabolic syndrome.

In the stepwise analysis, only PAS + D accumulation in >20 hepatocytes (OR 5.25; 95% CI 1.57–17.6; p = 0.007) and steatosis (OR 6.68; 95% CI 1.68–26.6; p = 0.007) remained significantly associated with metabolic syndrome.

SECTION

Non-invasive markers for fibrosis

PARAGRAPH

All patients underwent LSM by VCTE prior to liver biopsy.

A total of 78 patients (78.8%) met established criteria for a valid LSM and were included in the analysis.

Individuals who failed LSM had a higher BMI (32 vs. 27 kg/m2) and waist circumference (104 vs. 93 cm).

Median VCTE measurements were significantly higher in individuals with F ≥ 2 liver fibrosis (7.0 vs. 5.2 kPa, p = 0.007) The median and IQR of LSM measurements across fibrosis stages are shown (Fig. S1).

Overall, the accuracy of transient elastography to detect fibrosis stage 2 or higher was fair, with an area under receiver-operating characteristic curve (AUROC) of 0.70 (95% CI 0.58–0.82).

The accuracy for F3 or higher was better with AUROC of 0.92 (95% CI 0.84–1).

The best estimated LSM cut-off for F ≥ 2 was 5.45 kPa, which performed well to exclude F ≥ 2 (NPV 82%).

The best estimated LSM cut-off for F ≥ 3 was 8.45 kPa, which performed best to exclude F ≥ 3 (NPV 98%).

The calculated fibrosis indices of APRI and FIB-4 performed as well as VCTE in F ≥ 2 with similar AUROC, but are not as accurate to discriminate F ≥ 3.

Calculated indices of fibrosis were also significantly higher, including APRI (0.45 vs. 0.31 p <0.001) and FIB-4 (1.72 vs. 1.31 p = 0.08).

Comparatively, GGT performed better as a non-invasive marker than either APRI, FIB-4, AST, or ALT.

Details of the performance characteristics and the optimal cut-offs for detecting septal or bridging liver fibrosis are shown (Table 4).

The estimates of diagnostic accuracy suggest that LSM and clinical chemistries have some utility for ruling out fibrosis.

However, the accuracy of these estimates should be tempered by the small sample size and few individuals with advanced fibrosis.

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

Understanding the burden of AATD liver disease in adults is important for this rare disease community and the healthcare providers who care for them.

The risk of fibrosis is a critical issue to be addressed because it influences risk stratification and patient selection for emerging clinical trials in AATD liver therapies.

We report several findings that address current knowledge gaps.

First, significant fibrosis was found in over one-third of the cohort.

Second, the occult nature of liver fibrosis prior to cirrhosis development is highlighted by the range of fibrosis stages found.

Moreover, we identified groups with variable amounts of ATZ on biopsy and developed a simple scoring system to quantify the hepatocyte burden of alpha-1 antitrypsin accumulation by PAS + D.

PARAGRAPH

The strength of this study is that biopsies were performed prospectively and non-selectively in a large number of individuals.

As a result, liver disease is defined histologically and not by clinical symptoms or increases in aminotransferases.

In addition, this study population is representative of adults in the US with AATD by age, gender, and respiratory function based on the current composition of the research registry as well as previous descriptions of AATD in the US, indicating the results should be generalizable.28

PARAGRAPH

Our results confirm that advanced liver fibrosis is present without clinical liver disease, which was suggested by two smaller studies in adult AATD populations.

Investigators from the UK performed selected biopsies (n = 24) when the history or clinical findings suggested liver disease.

Stage ≥4 fibrosis was present in 17.5%.22

In a French pre-lung transplant AATD population (n = 23) undergoing liver biopsy, fibrosis stage ≥3 was present in 8.6%, and we report 6.4%.27

In these studies, the presence of stage 2 fibrosis was 37.4% and 26%, which is comparable to the 35% in the present study.

Collectively, these studies indicate that approximately one-third of adults with AATD have significant fibrosis on biopsy.

PARAGRAPH

Sustained signals of liver injury are required for significant liver fibrosis to develop.29

Abnormal ATZ accumulation is the presumed cause of liver injury leading to fibrosis in AATD.

By demonstrating a spectrum of hepatic ATZ accumulation, the variable clinical phenotype of ZZ liver disease becomes understandable.

The individuals with little to no ATZ accumulation may represent a population with additional protective genetic or environmental factors.

Those with significant ATZ accumulation may have additional harmful genetic or environmental factors.

The study findings provide support for a “toxic gain of function” related to the misfolded AAT protein.

The results substantiate animal model data that imbalanced proteostasis favors accumulation of ATZ and liver disease.

The additional factors that lead to more or less accumulation are not known, and will be the subject of further investigation in this cohort.

PARAGRAPH

The prevalence of hepatic steatosis in this AATD cohort was >40%, which is higher than the 20–30% expected for the general US population.30

One explanation is that the study population has steatosis secondary to NAFLD.

Alternatively, AATD per se is a secondary cause of hepatic steatosis, similar to other genetic/metabolic diseases.31

Steatosis was included in early descriptions of liver pathology and is commonly seen on biopsy, which furthers the notion that steatosis is related to AATD.10,22,27

Definitive NASH was present in only one biopsy in this cohort.

As such, significant fibrosis is more likely related to AATD than to the presence of NAFLD or NASH in the study population.

PARAGRAPH

Several studies have reported obesity as a risk factor for liver disease in adults with AATD.21,22

Metabolic syndrome is a novel but related finding.

We suspect a complex relationship exists between the accumulation of PAS + D globules, steatosis, fibrosis, and metabolic syndrome.

Simple steatosis did not increase the risk of fibrosis.

The biopsy findings most predictive of fibrosis were portal inflammation and the accumulation of ATZ, and ATZ accumulation was independently predictive of metabolic syndrome.

We hypothesize that cellular mechanisms working to prevent accumulation of misfolded ATZ in the ER are under additional stress in the presence of obesity and metabolic syndrome,32–36 which could lead to additional accumulation of ATZ.

Given the variable clinical phenotype of liver disease, we suspect AATD is a “first hit” sufficient to cause fibrosis on its own, and metabolic syndrome is an additional insult leading to advanced fibrosis.

Further studies are needed to clarify these interactions and if weight loss or other interventions could impact fibrosis.

PARAGRAPH

For routine clinical use, non-invasive methods to detect fibrosis would be preferred over biopsy.

Transient elastography performs adequately if used to rule out advanced fibrosis.

For example, if we applied the single cut-off value of 8.45 kPa for F ≥ 3 to our cohort, 83% of liver biopsies could be avoided for fibrosis staging.

Only one individual with F ≥ 3 would be missed using this strategy.

As a single test, GGT also performed well to predict fibrosis.

An elevated GGT has been noted in several ZZ cohorts without clinical liver disease, but the significance of this was not previously known.15,20

In children, GGT was associated with liver disease with portal hypertension, and with further validation it could become a biomarker for disease.37

PARAGRAPH

The current study has limitations that must be considered.

Sampling bias remains possible despite adequate biopsy size and number of portal tracts.

The choice of stage 2 fibrosis may not be universally regarded as clinically significant.

However, sufficient prospective data about natural history, risk factors for fibrosis, and rate of fibrosis progression in AATD are scarce.8

With limited data to inform the choice, stage 2 fibrosis was selected as significant because it implies chronicity and potentially evolving liver disease.

Also, individuals with known decompensated cirrhosis were excluded because a biopsy was not justified in that population, and targeted enrollment of cirrhotic patients introduces a selection bias.

As a consequence, the study results may underestimate the prevalence of advanced liver disease in the adult AATD population.

PARAGRAPH

In conclusion, health care providers should screen for liver disease in all AATD adults.

Clinical suspicion of fibrosis should be heightened if metabolic syndrome or fatty liver is present.

Annual testing should include a GGT and calculation of APRI and/or FIB-4 to help identify individuals at risk of advanced fibrosis.

Transient elastography may help identify those in whom a liver biopsy is necessary to confirm advanced fibrosis.

Future studies will determine the risk of fibrosis progression and the risk of clinically important liver outcomes such as cirrhosis and portal hypertension.

SECTION

Financial support

PARAGRAPH

This work was supported in part by funding from Fundacion Leopoldo Fernandez Pujals in support of Alpha-1 Research as well as the Alpha-1 Foundation.

RedCap Software was used for data collection which is supported by the Clinical and Translational Science Institute (CTSI) grant support (NIH National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS) grant UL1 TR000064).

SECTION

Conflict of interest

PARAGRAPH

The authors have no potential conflicts (financial, professional, or personal) relevant to the manuscript.

PARAGRAPH

Please refer to the accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.

SECTION

Authors’ contributions

PARAGRAPH

V.C. – study concept and design, acquisition of data, analysis and interpretation of data, drafting of manuscript, study supervision.

G.M. – acquisition of data, analysis and interpretation of data, critical revision of manuscript for important intellectual content, statistical analysis, technical support.

C.L. – analysis and interpretation of data, critical revision of manuscript for important intellectual content.

A.C. – analysis and interpretation of data, critical revision of manuscript for important intellectual content.

J.S. – statistical analysis, interpretation of data, critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content.

T.K. – acquisition of data, administrative support.

M.B. – study concept and design, analysis and interpretation of the data, critical revision of manuscript for important intellectual content, obtained funding, study supervision