10.1016/j.jhep.2018.01.034

ABSTRACT

TITLE

Impaired cerebral microcirculation induced by ammonium chloride in rats is due to cortical adenosine release

PARAGRAPH

Liver failure results in hyperammonaemia, impaired regulation of cerebral microcirculation, encephalopathy, and death.

However, the key mediator that alters cerebral microcirculation remains unidentified.

In this study we show that topically applied ammonium significantly increases periarteriolar adenosine tone on the brain surface of healthy rats and is associated with a disturbed microcirculation.

PARAGRAPH

Cranial windows were prepared in anaesthetized Wistar rats.

The flow velocities were measured by speckle contrast imaging and compared before and after 30 min of exposure to 10 mM ammonium chloride applied on the brain surface.

These flow velocities were compared with those for control groups exposed to artificial cerebrospinal fluid or ammonium plus an adenosine receptor antagonist.

A flow preservation curve was obtained by analysis of flow responses to a haemorrhagic hypotensive challenge and during stepwise exsanguination.

The periarteriolar adenosine concentration was measured with enzymatic biosensors inserted in the cortex.

PARAGRAPH

After ammonium exposure the arteriolar flow velocity increased by a median (interquartile range) of 21.7% (23.4%) vs. 7.2% (10.2%) in controls (n = 10 and n = 6, respectively, p <0.05), and the arteriolar surface area increased.

There was a profound rise in the periarteriolar adenosine concentration.

During the hypotensive challenge the flow decreased by 27.8% (14.9%) vs. 9.2% (14.9%) in controls (p <0.05).

The lower limit of flow preservation remained unaffected, 27.7 (3.9) mmHg vs. 27.6 (6.4) mmHg, whereas the autoregulatory index increased, 0.29 (0.33) flow units per millimetre of mercury vs. 0.03 (0.21) flow units per millimetre of mercury (p <0.05).

When ammonium exposure was combined with topical application of an adenosine receptor antagonist, the autoregulatory index was normalized.

PARAGRAPH

Vasodilation of the cerebral microcirculation during exposure to ammonium chloride is associated with an increase in the adenosine tone.

Application of a specific adenosine receptor antagonist restores the regulation of the microcirculation.

This indicates that adenosine could be a key mediator of the brain dysfunction seen during hyperammonaemia and is a potential therapeutic target.

