10.1016/j.jasrep.2018.10.009

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Material selection and weaving techniques for the oldest basketry in Japan found at the Higashimyou site, Saga Prefecture

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Among archaeological wooden objects, basketry is regarded as a kind of portable objects that can have important information for understanding subtle prehistoric cultural and social differences (Sands, 2013).

Prehistoric basketry has so far been studied extensively in North America (Adovasio, 2010; Carriere and Croes, 2018) and northern Africa (Wendrich, 2000; El Hadidi and Hamdy, 2011; Di Lernia et al., 2012; Wendrich and Holdaway, 2018), and their studies showed that prehistoric baskets can provide information on regional differences in communities and their historic changes.

The basket materials in these areas clearly showed local differences in material selection, such as roots, boughs, splints, and bark of Thuja plicata D. Don, Picea sitchensis (Bong.)

Carrière, Acer circinatum Pursh, and Prunus emarginata (Douglas) Walp.?

and leaves and stems of monocots in North America (Croes and Hawes, 2013; Carriere and Croes, 2018), Phoenix dactylifera L., Hyphaene thebaica Mart., Cyprus papyrus L., and others taxa in Egypt (Wendrich, 2000; El Hadidi and Hamdy, 2011), and monocot leaves or stems and animal fibers in Libya (Di Lernia et al., 2012).

By using cluster and cladistic analyses of basketry attributes and types, Croes (2001, 2015), Croes et al. (2009), and Carriere and Croes (2018) further proposed a hypothetical history of stylistic and ethnic continuity from basketry remains found in the Northwest Coast of North America.

In northern Africa, use of baskets is discussed in relation to the availably and storage of wild cereals and resource exploitation (Di Lernia et al., 2012) or to mobility and sedentism versus long-term caching by basketry lined storage pits (Wendrich and Holdaway, 2018).

Compared with the studies in these areas, few studies have been carried out on prehistoric basketry in East Asia including Japan, and regional or cultural differences and their historical changes have not been clarified (Matsunaga, 2015).

PARAGRAPH

In Japan, the study of basketry of the Jomon period, a Neolithic period in Japan from 16,000 to 2500 cal BP, characterized by manufacture of pottery, formation of pit dwellings, and lack of agriculture, lagged behind that of other wooden artifacts.

This is probably because only bamboos were used for basketry in the Kanto area, central Japan, where important lowland sites of the Jomon period were first excavated intensively, leading to the loss of interest among wood anatomists studying archaeological plant remains (Noshiro and Sasaki, 2014b).

According to a review of archaeological wooden remains excavated from Japan up to 2005, over 21,300 wooden artifacts and 32,500 natural woods of the Jomon period were reported and identified, whereas only 80 basket materials of the Jomon period were reported and identified (Itoh and Yamada, 2012).

With the discovery of a large number of baskets using various materials from splints to vine stems and the development of a plant anatomical technique for treating fragile basket materials since the early 2000s, a renewed interest is shown to the basketry of the Jomon period (Horikawa, 2011; Matsunaga, 2015).

At the Shimoyakebe site, Tokyo, in the Kanto area, Sasaki et al. (2014) showed that the people of the middle to final Jomon periods made baskets with various weaving and twilling techniques by using bamboo splints, probably of Pleioblastus chino (Franch.

et Sav.)

Makino, that were 0.26 to 0.64 mm thick, made by scraping off two thirds to seven eighth of the inner tissue of split culms.

A recent review of basketry remains found since 1980 in Japan lists 1146 baskets from 123 archaeological sites ranging from the Jomon period to the Muromachi period of the middle age, including 845 baskets from 46 site of the initial to final Jomon periods ranging from ca. 11,000 to ca. 2500 cal BP (Horikawa, 2011).

Horikawa (2011) pointed out the existence of regional differences in material selection and basketry technique through the studied periods, but the number of identified basket materials for the Jomon period was too few, only 140, to discuss regional differences or cultural background during this period.

PARAGRAPH

The Higashimyou site in Saga prefecture of western Japan yielded over 700 baskets including basket fragments of the initial Jomon period and provided a good material to examine the material selection and basketry technique of the incipient basketry manufacture and use in Japan.

The archaeological reports of the Higashimyou site that was excavated between 2004 and 2007 were published in 2009, and the selection of basket materials and the basketry techniques were reported in Noshiro et al. (2009) and Saga City Board of Education (2009, 2016c), respectively.

However, the material selection and basketry techniques at this site have not been discussed in the context of the use of plant resources in prehistoric Japan.

In Japan the existence of a prehistoric management of plant resources has been recognized since the early Jomon period starting at ca. 7000 cal BP, and this recognition of a prehistoric management system of plant resources has shown that the Jomon people had a middle ground subsistence system between hunter-gatherers and farmers (Crawford, 2008; Noshiro and Sasaki, 2014a, 2014b).

By citing occurrences of various cultigens and putative ones at Jomon sites, Crawford (2011) pointed out the possible production of not only food, but also various other resources by the Jomon people, and the basketry materials can possibly be included in this production of resources around settlements.

Moreover, a later analysis of basketry remains pointed out an existence of regional differences in basketry materials during the Jomon period (Noshiro and Sasaki, 2014b).

PARAGRAPH

Thus, to examine the importance of basketry manufacture in relation to the incipient management and use of plant resources in the Jomon period, the material selection and weaving technique of the oldest basketry in Japan found at the Higashimyou site have been studied.

SECTION

Materials and methods

SECTION

Location and archaeological characteristics of the Higashimyou site

PARAGRAPH

The Higashimyou site is located on the northern shore of the Ariake Sea in northern Kyushu of western Japan (Fig. 1; Saga City Board of Education, 2016a).

The site exists on the western fringe of an upland that extends southward from Sefuri mountains in the north.

The site extends from the upland at 3 m a.s.l. where a living area is thought to have exited judging from various gatherings of stones, animal bones, and human burials to the lowland at −3 m where shell middens were formed and a lot of pits were dug to use brackish water in the channel and spring water from the upland variously.

Beside these remains, ca. 40,000 pot sherds, ca. 43,000 stone tools, ca. 800 shell tools, ca. 1900 bone or antler tools, ca. 650 wooden tools and 24 ropes were obtained at this site.

The mid Holocene transgression called Jomon transgression in Japan that culminated during ca. 7000 to 5000 cal BP in central Japan (Endo, 2017) inundated the northern shore of the Ariake bay (Shimoyama et al., 1994), and the site was abandoned with the rising sea-level.

PARAGRAPH

In the lowland at this site 155 pits were made in and around shell middens, especially in and around shell midden no. 2, and included basket remains, acorns of evergreen and deciduous oaks, bundles of basket materials, antler tools, and unfinished wooden tools (Fig. 1; Saga City Board of Education, 2016a).

One fourth of ca. 730 basket remains including fragments were found in 94 pits, and the rest were found around the pits in the lowland (Saga City Board of Education, 2016b).

Several pits up to 2 m across included several baskets.

Baskets occasionally included oak acorns, especially of Quercus gilva Blume of Fagaceae, inside them and were often accompanied by scattered oak acorns and stakes thought to have supported the baskets.

Thus, most baskets are thought to be used for transport and preservation or processing of oak acorns in spring water seeped from pit walls or brackish water from the channel in the lowland.

Two large narrowly-mouthed baskets (SK2160-2, SK2138-2) that were reconstructed by modern basketry artisans could contain 17,500 and 23,000 acorns (35 and 46 l, 26.5 and 35.1 kg) of Quercus glauca Thunb., respectively, when they were two-thirds full (Saga City Board of Education, 2016b).

Because large baskets containing acorns are too heavy to be carried around, large ones are thought to be used for preservation or processing of oak acorns.

PARAGRAPH

The Higashimyou site was used from ca. 8000 cal BP to ca. 7400 cal BP of the late phase of the initial Jomon period (Fig. 2; Saga City Board of Education, 2016c).

Before people settled down at this site at ca. 8000 cal BP, this area was surrounded by deciduous forests dominated by Quercus sect. Aegilops, and fresh water filled the channel in the lowland.

When people settled down ca. 8000 cal BP, the channel was filled with brackish water caused by transgression, and shell middens came to be formed since ca. 7970 cal BP.

The formation of shell midden no. 1 was most active between ca. 7900 and ca. 7850 cal BP, and pits were dug most actively at both shell middens nos. 1 and 2 in this period.

After ca. 7800 cal BP, shell middens nos. 2 and 3 were formed most actively between ca. 7770 and ca. 7730 cal BP along with digging of pits.

This site was abandoned between ca. 7700 and ca. 7500 cal BP probably due to a minor regression.

People settled down again between ca. 7500 and ca. 7370 cal BP, and shell middens consisting of oysters were formed.

The lowland at this site was inundated by the rising sea after ca. 7370 cal BP, and the site was buried by mudflows caused by increased precipitation of the hypsithermal.

SECTION

Baskets of the Higashimyou site

PARAGRAPH

Four types of baskets can be roughly recognized from the size and shape of baskets (Fig. 3; Saga City Board of Education, 2009, 2016b).

The large type was over 50 cm tall and was bag-shaped with the largest horizontal diameter in the lower half of the body.

This type included widely-mouthed and narrowly-mouthed types, and the former accounted for 90% of 203 baskets of the large type.

The small type was less than 50 cm tall and had the largest horizontal diameter at or a little below the mouth.

This type included a widely-mouthed type whose diameter is similar to the height, a slender type that are over 40 cm tall.

The widely-mouthed type accounted for 93% of 54 baskets of the small type.

Besides these two main types, two baskets were small and shallow, 40 × 21 cm across and less than 5 cm tall, and were similar to modern shallow baskets used as colanders.

PARAGRAPH

Typical baskets recovered at the Higashimyou site were made from several component parts (Fig. 4; Saga City Board of Education, 2016b).

A basket usually consists of the base, the body, and the mouth, but most baskets recovered at the site lacked the mouth and had indistinct distinction between the base and the body.

The bodies of typical baskets recovered at the site were usually divided into the lower and upper parts by belts that were woven by using different materials from the bodies.

Different weaving techniques were often used in the lower and upper parts, and belts worked as reinforcement and as the controlling point of the number of warps from the lower to the upper body.

The rim was usually made by folding the ends of warps and keeping them with horizontal reinforcement elements.

Both of them were twined by selvage wefts.

The mouth closing ropes crisscrossed the mouth opening.

The holding ropes loosely looped between the rim and belts and probably worked as catches for the mouth closing ropes.

PARAGRAPH

Various weaving techniques were used for the bodies of the baskets recovered at the Higashimyou site (Fig. 5; Saga City Board of Education, 2016b).

For the terminology of basketry techniques, we followed Norton (1990) and Carriere and Croes (2018).

Several elements that did the same move were regarded as one unit, and weaving techniques were recognized by the move of each unit.

Weaving included plain, uneven, and herringbone weave, and twill included even 2/2, herringbone, and diamond twill.

Beside these, hexagonal weave, simple twining, and three-ply twining were recognized in the basket bodies.

The basketry selvage included coiled, looped, tuck and wrap, and circle-eight wrap techniques, and simply tucking bent down ends of warps into lower wefts.

SECTION

Methods of identification

PARAGRAPH

At least two samples for identification were obtained from warps and wefts of the body of each almost intact basket with clear directions.

Two samples were also obtained from fragments of basket bodies without clear directions.

The samples for identification were either sectioned manually without embedding or sectioned with a rotary microtome after embedding, depending on the preservation and conservation treatment of materials.

Manual sections were cut with razor blades and were mounted with gum chloral (a mixture of chloral hydrate 50 g, gum arabic 40 g, glycerine 20 ml, and pure water 50 ml).

Embedded sections were made by dehydrating specimens with an alcohol or acetone series, embedding them in paraffin or epoxy resin, and sectioning them with a rotary microtome.

Obtained preparations were identified with an optical microscope referring to extant specimens preserved at Botanical Gardens, Tohoku University and Forestry and Forest Products Research Institute, Tsukuba, Japan.

All the preparations are preserved at Botanical Gardens, Tohoku University.

SECTION

Results

SECTION

Identification of basket materials

PARAGRAPH

Basket materials included stems of two arboreal species, Sapindus mukorossi Gaertn.

and Ficus erecta Thunb., and two woody vines, Sinomenium acutum (Thunb.)

Rehd.

et Wils.

and Trachelospermum (Fig. 6).

Stems of woody species were mostly split into radially thin splints that are 2.5–13 mm wide tangentially and 1–2 mm thick radially.

Vine stems of 1–9 mm in diameter were used wholly or split into halves.

PARAGRAPH

Identification of taxa is based on the following wood anatomical features.

Sapindus mukorossi Gaertn.

(Sapindaceae) (Fig. 6a–d)

PARAGRAPH

Ring-porous wood; earlywood vessels round, ca. 150 μm in diameter, solitary or in clusters of two; latewood vessels thin-walled, ca. 15–50 μm in diameter, usually in clusters or multiples of 2–5.

Vessel perforations simple, helical thickening in narrow latewood vessel elements.

Axial parenchyma vasicentric in earlywood, aliform to confluent in latewood.

Rays homocellular, 2–3 cells wide.

Ficus erecta Thunb.

(Moraceae) (Fig. 6e–h)

PARAGRAPH

Diffuse-porous wood with sparse, round, rather thick-walled vessels, ca. 30–90 μm in diameter, solitary or in multiples of 2–3.

Vessel perforations simple.

Axial parenchyma banded ca. 5–10 cells wide.

Rays heterocellular, usually with one row of upright cells, 3–6 cells wide.

Sinomenium acutum (Thunb.)

Rehd.

et Wils.

(Menispermaceae) (Fig. 6i–j)

PARAGRAPH

Wood with little secondary xylem, 16–20 oval vascular bundles around a pith of ca. 1.5 mm in diameter; vascular bundles consisting of 2–3 solitary vessels, ca. 60–100 μm in diameter.

Fibers in arch-shaped sheaths outside vascular bundles.

Epidermis 1 cell wide with thick cuticle; cuticle smooth outside, forming arches over epidermal cells.

PARAGRAPH

Diffuse-porous wood with radial pattern; vessels thick-walled, ca. 30–100 μm in diameter, mostly solitary or occasionally in radial multiples of 2.

Vessel perforations simple.

Rays composed of upright cells, 1–2 cells wide.

Uniseriate rays, multiseriate rays, and vessel elements irregularly storied.

SECTION

Selection of basket materials

PARAGRAPH

Body elements of 282 baskets were identified.

Both warps and wefts were identified in 195 baskets (Table 1), and elements with unknown directions were identified in 87 baskets (Table 2).

Belts, holding ropes, and mouth closing ropes were identified in 177, 71, and 2 baskets, respectively (Table 3).

Selection of materials did not differ between ages recognized at this site either for body elements or other parts of the baskets, although materials of age division 4 were few.

PARAGRAPH

For the body elements of large baskets, the material selection was fixed, and either Sapindus mukorossi or Ficus erecta was selected and used in both widely- and narrowly-mouthed types, respectively accounting for 75% and 17% of large baskets (Tables 1, 2).

Usually either taxon was used for both warps and wefts of a basket, but occasionally these taxa were used together in one basket.

In three baskets, Sapindus mukorossi was used together with Sinomenium acutum.

PARAGRAPH

For the body elements of small widely-mouthed baskets, the material selection was lax (Tables 1, 2).

In some baskets Sinomenium acutum, Sapindus mukorossi, or Ficus erecta was used for both warps and wefts.

In some others Sinomenium acutum was used together with Sapindus mukorossi or Ficus erecta.

Besides these taxa Trachelospermum and an unknown vine were used for elements with unknown directions.

In small slender baskets, Sapindus mukorossi was used for both warps and wefts of two baskets, and Sinomenium acutum or Trachelospermum was used for elements of unknown directions in three baskets.

In two shallow baskets, Sapindus mukorossi was used for both warps and wefts.

PARAGRAPH

For the belts in the middle of basket bodies Sinomenium acutum was used exclusively, accounting for 93% of 176 belts, and was followed by Trachelospermum, Sapindus mukorossi, Ficus erecta and other taxa (Table 3).

Belts of Sinomenium acutum or Trachelospermum were used for baskets of various sizes and types, but those of Sapindus mukorossi or Ficus erecta were used only for large narrowly-mouthed baskets.

PARAGRAPH

For the horizontal reinforcement elements at the rim, both Sapindus mukorossi and Sinomenium acutum were preferentially used in both large and small baskets, accompanied by Ficus erecta and Trachelospermum (Table 3).

For selvage wefts, Sinomenium acutum was basically selected, accompanied by Sapindus mukorossi or Ficus erecta.

PARAGRAPH

For holding ropes, Sinomenium acutum was used exclusively, accounting for 87% of 70 holding ropes, and was followed by other taxa (Table 4).

For mouth closing ropes, Sinomenium acutum and a monocot were used.

SECTION

Basketry techniques and use of materials for the bodies of baskets

PARAGRAPH

The basketry techniques used for the lower and upper parts of the body usually differed across the belts, especially among large baskets (Table 5; Figs. 3, 4).

The various techniques were used irrespective of basket materials, and the material selection did not affect the basketry techniques being used.

PARAGRAPH

In large baskets, the lower part of the body was mostly made by even 2/2, herringbone, and diamond twill, and the upper part tended to be made by plain weave or even 2/2 twill.

In some large baskets, the basketry technique did not change across the belts, and the technique used in the lower part was again used in the upper part.

In several large baskets, more than two techniques were used in the upper part of the body, and two techniques were used both in the upper and lower parts of the body in one basket.

PARAGRAPH

Although some small baskets lacking belts had the same basketry technique through the bodies, small baskets having belts tended to be made by using the same basketry technique across belts (Table 5).

In several small baskets, the lower part of the body was made by even 2/2 twill, diamond twill, and hexagonal weave, and the upper part was made by plain weave.

In one small basket, both simple twining and even 2/2 twill were used both in the lower and upper parts.

SECTION

Discussion

SECTION

Basketry manufacture of the initial Jomon period

PARAGRAPH

The identification of basket materials recovered at the Higashimyou site showed that the Jomon people living at the site mainly used splints of two arboreal species, Sapindus mukorossi and Ficus erecta, and stems of two woody vines, Sinomenium acutum and Trachelospermum.

Sapindus mukorossi is a deciduous tree up to 25 m tall and 1 m in stem diameter growing in the warm-temperate and subtropical areas of western Japan and E, SE, and S Asia, and its pericarps contain much saponin and are used as detergent (Ohashi, 2016).

Ficus erecta is a deciduous shrub up to 3–5 m tall growing in western Japan, S Korea, and S Formosa (Yonekura, 2016).

Sinomenium acutum is a deciduous vine up to 3 cm in stem diameter growing in western Japan, Korea, China, and Formosa (Nemoto, 2016).

Trachelospermum is an evergreen vine including three species distributed in Japan, and T. jasminoides (Lindl.)

Lemaire var.

pubescence Makino and T. asiaticum (Siebold et Zucc.

Nakai var.

asiaticum grow in western Japan including northern Kyushu around the site (Yamashiro, 2017).

Depending on the size and type of baskets, the Jomon people living at the Higashimyou site used these materials with various basketry techniques already in the late phase of the initial Jomon period ranging from ca. 8000 to ca. 7400 cal BP.

PARAGRAPH

Although the baskets of the Higashimyou site were made with plants growing in the warm-temperate area of western Japan, the Jomon people living in other areas of Japan used various local materials (Horikawa, 2011; Noshiro and Sasaki, 2014b; Sasaki et al., 2014).

Beside northern Kyushu, splints of arboreal species were used as basketry materials in the Japan Sea side of Honshu, but splints of only conifers were used in that area along with stems of a deciduous vine, Actinidia.

Bamboos were exclusively selected in the Pacific side of central Japan and the Ryukyu islands of southwestern Japan.

Because forest vegetation similar to the present one was established at least in the initial Jomon period (Ooi, 2016), it is not likely that regional selection of basketry materials changed greatly through the Jomon period.

Thus, regional differences in basketry materials probably reflects differences in regional vegetation, but may also reflect regional differences in material preferences, because some species of bamboos or Actinidia grow throughout Japan and can be found in every region.

However, it is not known if there exist specific differences among bamboos or Actinidia as basket materials, or these differences or regional preferences lead to regional differences in material selection during the Jomon period.

PARAGRAPH

In northern Kyushu the selection of basket materials and techniques seems to have changed through the Jomon period.

In this area, beside the Higashimyou site, the Sotaba site in middle Kumamoto and the Nakamura-cho site in northern Fukuoka yielded baskets of the early Jomon period, and the Shofukuji site in southern Fukuoka yielded baskets of the late Jomon period.

At the Sobata site, splints of Quercus subgen.

Cyclobalanopsis (Fagaceae) and Ficus erecta and adventitious roots of Ampelopsis cantoniensis (Hook.

et Arn.)

Planch.

var.

leeoides (Maxim.)

F.Y. Lu (Vitaceae) were selected for 22 baskets made by various weaving and twilling techniques, and adventitious roots of Ampelopsis cantoniensis var.

leeoides were also used for belts, horizontal reinforcement elements, and selvage wefts (Noshiro et al., unpublished).

At the Nakamura-cho site, splints of Quercus subgen.

Cyclobalanopsis was selected for 6 baskets made mostly by even 2/2 twill (Noshiro et al., 2012).

At the Shofukuji site, vine stems of Sinomenium acutum and Trachelospermum and adventitious roots of Ampelopsis cantoniensis var.

leeoides were selected for 76 baskets made by simple twining (Noshiro et al., 2017).

Thus, in northern Kyushu, use of both dicot wood splints and vine stems for baskets made with various weaving techniques in the initial to early Jomon periods seems to have changed to that of only vine stems for baskets made with simple twining in the late to final Jomon periods.

However, the number of recovered baskets of the Jomon period is still too few to discuss such historical changes in material selection and basketry technique not only in Kyushu, but also in other areas of Japan.

SECTION

Selection of basket materials at the Higashimyou site

PARAGRAPH

Although Sapindus mukorossi, Ficus erecta, Sinomenium acutum, and Trachelospermum were exclusively selected for baskets at the Higashimyou site, it is doubtful if these plants were easily available around the site, judging from wooden remains and pollen record obtained at the site.

Among 683 wooden artifacts with clear human processing, Sapindus mukorossi and Ficus erecta respectively accounted for 1.6% and 0.3%, and, among 431 natural woods without human processing, they respectively accounted for 0.7% and 0.0%, and no remains of the two vines were detected (Noshiro et al., 2009).

In the pollen record at this site, Sapindus attained 2% only after the deposition of shell midden no. 2 and was detected less than 1% in all other horizons (Kanehara and Cultural Assets Scientific Research Center, 2016).

Moreover, only a few seeds of Sapindus mukorossi were obtained from pits and sediments at this site (Kanehra et al., 2009).

During the initial or early Jomon periods, beside the Higashimyou site, only one natural wood of Sapindus mukorossi and three processed wooden pieces of Ficus have been reported in northern Kyushu (Itoh and Yamada, 2012), and seeds or fruits of Sapindus mukorossi and those of Sinomenium acutum have been reported only at one site (https://www.rekihaku.ac.jp/up-cgi/login.pl?p=param/issi/db_param; Ishida et al., 2016).

Thus, although the warm-temperate evergreen forests reconstructed from the pollen record at this site is the habitat of the four taxa selected as basket materials (Kanehara and Cultural Assets Scientific Research Center, 2016; Nemoto, 2016; Ohashi, 2016; Yamashiro, 2017; Yonekura, 2016), they do not seem to have grown commonly around the site in the initial to early Jomon periods.

Probably, these four taxa grew in the inner areas of the upland or nearer to Sefuri mountains to the north and did not leave plant remains in the lowland at this site or at other sites in northern Kyushu.

PARAGRAPH

Resource management for basket materials probably existed, at least for Sapindus mukorossi, as an integral part of the resource production detected in the Jomon period (Crawford, 2011; Noshiro and Sasaki, 2014a, 2014b).

According to craftsmen making maple baskets using splints from stems of Acer pictum Thunb.

in northern Japan, straight stems 7–8 cm in diameter of 20–30 years old trees without branches or knots provide good materials, but stems from older trees are too brittle to be used for basketry (interviewed in 2011 at Kakunodate, Akita).

Because Acer pictum is a deciduous tree growing up to 25 m tall, similar to Sapindus mukorossi (Ohashi, 2016), and attaining ca. 180 years in age (Watanabe, 1994), the materials for maple baskets are obtained from young trees growing as understory elements.

In present Kyushu, however, Sapindus mukorossi does not grow commonly, and it is not easy to find straight thin stems of young trees in the mountains (Suzuki et al., 2016).

Because their fruits were probably used as detergent, Sapindus mukorossi usually accompanied Jomon settlements, but not as commonly as Castanea crenata Siebold et Zucc.

Among the lowland sites of the Jomon period, Castanea crenata whose resources was managed around Jomon settlements occur, on average, 35.9 remains per site at 205 sites, whereas Sapindus mukorossi occurs 9.0 remains per site at 35 sites (Itoh and Yamada, 2012).

Thus, to fill the large demand of basket materials found at the Higashimyou site, special care to grow young plants of Sapindus mukorossi seem to have been taken to make enough number of appropriate slender stems fit for basketry manufacture.

PARAGRAPH

Differing from Sapindus mukorossi uncommon at present, Ficus erecta, Sinomenium acutum, and Trachelospermum commonly grow in present Kyushu, and it does not seem to have been difficult to find good materials of theirs fit for basketry around the Higashimyou site in the initial Jomon period.

However, Ficus erecta growing as understory elements often branches near the ground-level in present Kyushu, and it is not easy to find straight slender stems without knots (Suzuki et al., 2016).

As for the two vine species, climbing stems are too hard and brittle for basketry, and stems creeping on the ground are used in the present basketry manufacture (interviewed in 2008 at Okuni, Yamagata).

Thus, even for these species, some kind of management of resources may have existed to obtain enough quantity of good basketry materials around the Higashimyou site, and the resource production in the initial Jomon period already seem to have included such subtle details in the management of plant resources.

SECTION

Conclusion

PARAGRAPH

Baskets of the Higashimyou site showed the incipient material selection and basketry techniques in prehistoric Japan and also the employment of most basketry techniques used in later periods in Japan already in the initial Jomon period.

In spite of such an early existence of standard basketry techniques and their continued use in later Jomon periods, regional differences in material selection seemed to have existed continuously, probably reflecting regional differences in vegetation and material preferences (Noshiro and Sasaki, 2014b; Sasaki et al., 2014).

Although some kind of management of plant resources seems to have existed even for basketry materials, it is not known how their management was incorporated in the intensive management of plant resources around settlements found in central to northeastern Japan (Noshiro and Sasaki, 2014a, 2014b).

Beside pottery types so far used exclusively to establish the cultural and regional differences in the Jomon society, baskets have enough regional variability to be a good material to discuss such differences and their historical changes through the Jomon period.

As carried out in the Northwest Coast of North America (Croes, 2001, 2015; Croes et al., 2009; Carriere and Croes, 2018) or in northern Africa (Di Lernia et al., 2012; Wendrich and Holdaway, 2018), with future recovery and study of baskets from lowland sites in Japan, baskets seem to show other aspects of the Jomon society not yet clarified from the study of pottery types.