10.1016/j.jhep.2018.11.034

ABSTRACT

TITLE

Metformin modulates innate immune-mediated inflammation and early progression of NAFLD-associated hepatocellular carcinoma in zebrafish

PARAGRAPH

Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease/non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NAFLD/NASH) is an increasing clinical problem associated with progression to hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).

The effect of a high-fat diet on the early immune response in HCC is poorly understood, while the role of metformin in treating NAFLD and HCC remains controversial.

Herein, we visualized the early immune responses in the liver and the effect of metformin on progression of HCC using optically transparent zebrafish.

PARAGRAPH

We used live imaging to visualize liver inflammation and disease progression in a NAFLD/NASH-HCC zebrafish model.

We combined a high-fat diet with a transgenic zebrafish HCC model induced by hepatocyte-specific activated beta-catenin and assessed liver size, angiogenesis, micronuclei formation and inflammation in the liver.

In addition, we probed the effects of metformin on immune cell composition and early HCC progression.

PARAGRAPH

We found that a high-fat diet induced an increase in liver size, enhanced angiogenesis, micronuclei formation and neutrophil infiltration in the liver.

Although macrophage number was not affected by diet, a high-fat diet induced changes in macrophage morphology and polarization with an increase in liver associated TNFα-positive macrophages.

Treatment with metformin altered macrophage polarization, reduced liver size and reduced micronuclei formation in NAFLD/NASH-associated HCC larvae.

Moreover, a high-fat diet reduced T cell density in the liver, which was reversed by treatment with metformin.

PARAGRAPH

These findings suggest that diet alters macrophage polarization and exacerbates the liver inflammatory microenvironment and cancer progression in a zebrafish model of NAFLD/NASH-associated HCC.

Metformin specifically affects the progression induced by diet and modulates the immune response by affecting macrophage polarization and T cell infiltration, suggesting possible effects of metformin on tumor surveillance.

