10.1016/j.jhep.2018.11.034

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Metformin modulates innate immune-mediated inflammation and early progression of NAFLD-associated hepatocellular carcinoma in zebrafish

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a common cause of cancer-related deaths with increasing mortality worldwide.1

In Western societies, 30–40% of patients with HCC are obese and have non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), an aggressive form of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD).2–5

Abnormal lipid accumulation in hepatocytes increases oxidative stress and leads to lipotoxicity, which triggers liver inflammation, a hallmark of NAFLD progression to HCC.6

Pro-tumorigenic subsets of neutrophils, macrophages, and other immune cells provide the tumor microenvironment (TME) with growth factors, matrix-remodeling factors and inflammatory mediators that optimize tumor growth.7–10

Hepatic macrophages in particular, including both monocyte-derived or tissue-resident macrophages known as Kupffer cells, have been identified as potential drug targets to treat liver disease.11

Several studies have shown that NAFLD progression to HCC involves inflammatory macrophages12 and Kupffer cells.13

Adaptive immune cells can also be modulators of hepatocarcinogenesis.

NAFLD/NASH impairs tumor surveillance by inducing apoptosis of CD4+ T cells.14

Taken together, this previous work suggests that the innate and adaptive immune systems are key players in the progression of NAFLD-associated HCC.

However, the specific cellular and molecular immune mechanisms that regulate the pathogenesis of early NAFLD/NASH-associated HCC remain unclear.

PARAGRAPH

Metformin is a well-tolerated drug commonly used to treat diabetes with some evidence suggesting beneficial effects in HCC and other types of cancer.15

In hepatocytes, metformin increases AMPK activity,16 and also decreases gluconeogenesis and increases fatty acid oxidation,17 supporting its use in NAFLD.18

The role of metformin in treating HCC remains controversial,19 although its use is supported by some in vitro, ex vivo and xenotransplant mouse models.20,21

However, the effect of metformin on the TME immune composition or HCC progression in vivo remains unclear.

PARAGRAPH

To image the immune response and liver tumorigenesis in live intact animals, we developed a zebrafish model of NASH-associated HCC.

Here we combine a high-fat diet (HFD) with an established transgenic zebrafish model of HCC.22

Zebrafish have remarkable similarities to humans, including hepatic cellular composition, function, signaling, and response to injury.23

We found that HFD enhances HCC progression and modulates the immune response in the liver TME.

HFD induces changes in macrophage polarization with increased numbers of TNFα-positive macrophages in the liver.

Metformin blocks the effects of a HFD on the inflammatory microenvironment and HCC progression.

Moreover, the findings suggest that metformin inhibits HCC progression specifically in NASH-associated HCC by reducing diet-induced liver inflammation and potentially restoring tumor T cell surveillance.

SECTION

Materials and methods

SECTION

Zebrafish husbandry and maintenance

PARAGRAPH

All protocols using zebrafish in this study were approved by the University of Wisconsin-Madison Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC).

Adult zebrafish and embryos up to 5 days post-fertilization (dpf) were maintained as described previously.24

At 5 dpf, larvae were transferred to feeding containers and kept in E3 media without methylene blue.

For all experiments, larvae were anesthetized in E3 media without methylene blue containing 0.16 mg/ml Tricaine (MS222/ethyl 3-aminobenzoate; Sigma-Aldrich).

Zebrafish lines used are summarized in Table S1.

SECTION

Diet preparation and feeding of zebrafish larvae

PARAGRAPH

Larval diets were prepared as previously described25 using Golden Pearl Diet 5–50 nm Active Spheres.

At 5 dpf, zebrafish larvae were separated into treatment groups in E3 without methylene blue.

According to the number of larvae, larvae were maintained in a 15 cm petri dish (up to 20 larvae), a small breeding box (20–75 larvae) or a big breeding box (75 up to 150 larvae), and fed for 8 days with normal diet or HFD (with 2 mg, 4.5 mg or 6–8 mg daily, respectively), E3 was replaced daily.

Before any experimental procedure, larvae were fasted for 24 h.

At 13 dpf, larvae were prescreened for HCC (Green Eye marker) or no HCC, and/or liver marker (Green Liver or Red Liver markers) on Zeiss Axio Zoom stereo microscope (EMS3/SyCoP3; Zeiss; Zeiss; PlanNeoFluar Z 1X:0.25 FWD 56 mm lens).

SECTION

Statistical analysis

PARAGRAPH

All experiments were replicated independently a minimum of 3 times with multiple samples in each replicate.

Least Squared Means analysis in R (www.r-project.org)26 was performed on pooled replicate experiments, using Tukey method when comparing more than 2 treatments.

This analysis method was used in all experiments with the exception of lipid, Glycogen, micronuclei scorings and steatosis, for which we used Chi-square test.

Statistical analysis was performed with the assistance of a Biostatistician in the Department of Pediatrics at the University of Wisconsin-Madison.

Graphical representations were done in GraphPad Prism version 7.

SECTION

Other methods and reagents

PARAGRAPH

Other methods are described in the Supplementary Material and Methods.

To enhance the reproducibility of all the methods used in this study a Supplementary CTAT Table is also provided.

SECTION

Results

SECTION

HFD and HCC increase liver size and induce angiogenesis during early progression in a zebrafish HCC model

PARAGRAPH

The zebrafish is a powerful model organism for liver disease research, including NAFLD and HCC.23

Here we used a HCC transgenic zebrafish model that expresses hepatocyte-specific activated β-catenin (Tg (fabp10a:pt-β-cat)).22

We focused our study on the early progression phase of HCC and used 13 days post-fertilization (dpf) Tg (fabp10a:pt-β-cat) larvae, with or without a liver marker, Tg(fabp10a:egfp) or Tg(fabp10a:h2bmCherry), referred to here as HCC larvae (Table S1).

In addition, to induce NAFLD in zebrafish,25,27 we fed wild-type larvae a high-cholesterol diet, hereafter referred to as a HFD, from days 5–12.25

Oil red staining showed that the short-term feeding of a HFD was able to induce steatosis in the liver of 13 dpf larvae (Fig. S1).

Liver size was increased both in the HCC model and with a HFD alone (Fig. S2A-C; Fig. 1A and C); importantly these effects were not associated with changes in total body size (Fig. S3A-C).

PARAGRAPH

Increased angiogenesis is an important feature of HCC progression,28 and it has also been associated with NAFLD progression in mouse models after long periods of feeding.29–31

We therefore characterized the vasculature in the liver using an established transgenic line that labels the vasculature, Tg (flk:mcherry) (Table S1).

HCC larvae exhibited increased vessel density index by liver volume and liver surface area compared to control siblings (Fig. 1A, B and D; Fig. S2D; Movie S1 and S3).

Surprisingly, larvae fed with a HFD also showed increased vessel density index by liver volume and liver surface area after only short-term feeding (Fig. 1A, B and D; Fig. S2D; Movie S1 and S2), suggesting that diet alone is sufficient to induce angiogenesis after short durations in zebrafish larvae.

SECTION

Histologic changes with HFD and HCC

PARAGRAPH

Both HCC and a HFD induce histologic changes in the liver in zebrafish.22,27,32

To determine if the characteristic histological changes are present during the larval period, we first performed a blinded, conventional histopathological evaluation of hematoxylin and eosin-stained sections in 13 dpf larvae (Fig. S4).

We performed semiquantitative analysis of lipid accumulation and non-lipid vacuolar change (glycogen accumulation/ballooning degeneration), which are histologic features associated with NASH, and found that these features were more pronounced in larvae fed with HFD (Fig. S4A-D).

HCC larvae displayed histologic characteristics of hepatocellular carcinoma, including altered tissue architecture (such as thickened hepatic cords), increased nuclear pleomorphism, and increased mitotic index (Fig. S4A, B, D and E); such features were not found in control or with HFD alone.

We next took advantage of the optical accessibility of zebrafish larvae to evaluate several cellular and nuclear parameters associated with malignancy using non-invasive imaging techniques.

We outcrossed a transgenic line with labeled hepatic nuclei, Tg(fabp10a:pt-β-catenin)/(fabp10a:h2b-mCherry), with a line that labels F-actin specifically in hepatocytes, Tg(fabp10a:lifeact-egfp) (Table S1).

We measured hepatocyte area, nuclear area, nuclear circularity and nuclear cytoplasmic ratio (N:C ratio) (Fig. 1E-J).

In HCC larvae, we observed an increase in hepatocyte area (Fig. 1E and G).

Nuclear alterations associated with carcinogenesis were also observed, such as enlarged nuclei, measured by nuclear area, and altered nuclear shape, measured by nuclear circularity (Fig. 1E, F, H and I).

As expected, larvae exposed to HFD showed cell morphology changes characterized by a ballooning effect on hepatocytes, as indicated by increased hepatocyte area (Fig. 1E and G).

The short-term high-fat feeding alone did not induce nuclear alterations (Fig. 1E, F, H and I).

However, we observed enlarged hepatocytes with displaced nuclei localized at the edge of the cell with HFD, as reported in NAFLD/NASH disease33 (Fig. 1E).

No significant changes were found in N:C ratio at this stage(Fig. 1J).

DNA damage is also a hallmark of carcinogenesis, which is usually associated with repeated rounds of nuclear envelope rupture and repair that promotes formation of micronuclei or nuclear herniation.34

Using our zebrafish transgenic lines with the nuclear marker H2B-mCherry (Table S1), we visualized the presence of micronuclei in larvae in vivo.

We found that both HCC and HFD induced the presence of micronuclei and/or nuclear herniation, which was not found in control larvae (Fig. 1F and K).

Our findings suggest that HCC and HFD have distinct effects on histologic features, consistent with the changes noted in human disease.

SECTION

NAFLD and HCC zebrafish models exhibit an early increase in leukocyte infiltration

PARAGRAPH

Next, to address the inflammatory response in larvae with HCC or HFD alone, we used a double-labeled macrophage and neutrophil transgenic line (Tg(mfap4:tdTomato-caax)/(lyzc:bfp) (Table S1).

The translucency of zebrafish larvae enabled non-invasive time-lapse imaging of leukocytes in the liver area.

Both HCC and HFD alone displayed a significant increase in macrophage density at 13 dpf (Fig. 2A, B and D; Movie S5-7).

Hepatic macrophages were present in control larvae, and displayed crawling and patrolling both in the liver and the surrounding area that was increased in HCC (Movie S5 and S7).

Macrophages in larvae fed with HFD displayed a more stationary phenotype than in control larvae (Movies S5 and S6).

The diet also induced a rounder and larger macrophage morphology, not observed in control or HCC larvae (Fig. 2A, B and E; Movie S6 and S7).

Neutrophil density was also increased in larvae with HCC and fed HFD compared to control siblings (Fig. 2A, C and F; Movie S5-7).

These results demonstrate that short-term feeding of HFD induces a NASH-like phenotype in zebrafish.

Altogether, our data suggest that liver inflammation is triggered early both in HCC and by HFD.

SECTION

HFD stimulates cancer progression in zebrafish HCC larvae

PARAGRAPH

NAFLD and NASH can lead to the progression to HCC in humans.1

NASH-associated HCC incidence is increasing, however there are a lack of animal models amenable to live imaging and drug screening.

Therefore, we combined two established zebrafish models for NASH and HCC, and developed a model of NASH-associated HCC by feeding HCC zebrafish larvae with a HFD (HCC + HFD larvae).

We first addressed the diet effect on HCC progression by measuring liver size.

In HCC larvae, a HFD induced liver enlargement as measured by area, surface area and volume without affecting larval length, but significantly increasing larvae width (Fig. 3A, C and D; Fig. S2A and B; Fig. S3A-C).

Vessel formation was also increased in HCC + HFD larvae compared to HCC alone (Fig. 3A, B, E and F; Movie S3 and 4).

Importantly, histopathological analysis revealed that HCC larvae fed a HFD displayed features of both NAFLD and HCC (Fig. S5A-F).

HCC + HFD larvae also exhibited increased hepatocellular lipid and glycogen accumulation compared to HCC larvae (Fig. S5A-D).

The lipid accumulation translated into an increase of hepatocyte size in HCC + HFD larvae (Fig. 3G and I).

Although greater nuclear pleomorphism and a trend toward more trinucleated cells was noted in the HCC larvae fed a HFD, significant changes in trinucleated cell numbers and mitotic index were not observed in hematoxylin and eosin analysis (Fig. S5A, B, E and F).

However, in vivo imaging showed that HFD for a short duration is able to induce malignant cellular and nuclear changes during the early HCC progression phase.

HCC + HFD larvae exhibited lower nuclear circularity, higher N:C ratio and more micronuclei and nuclear herniation compared to HCC larvae alone (Fig. 3G, H, J-L).

Together, these findings suggest that HFD enhances malignancy-related histologic and morphologic features in HCC larvae.

SECTION

HFD increases proliferation and induces lipotoxicity in zebrafish HCC larvae

PARAGRAPH

Lipid accumulation in hepatocytes mediates endoplasmic reticulum stress and mitochondrial dysfunction and triggers apoptosis.6,35

We next addressed the lipotoxic effect of the diet in HCC larvae by quantifiying apoptosis using whole-mount immunofluorescence against active-caspase 3 (act-casp3).

An increase in hepatic apoptosis was observed in HCC + HFD compared to HCC alone (Fig. 3M and N).

This lipotoxicity effect in the liver was accompanied by an increase in proliferation of HCC larvae fed with HFD measured by EdU incorporation (Fig. 3O and P).

Importantly, control larvae exposed to the diet also showed increased apoptosis and proliferation suggesting that these mechanisms are activated by the exposure of larvae to the HFD (Fig. S6A and B).

SECTION

NASH-associated HCC larvae display altered immune cell responses

PARAGRAPH

We next sought to determine if a HFD alters the immune phenotype of HCC larvae.

We found that macrophage influx in the liver was not affected by diet in HCC larvae (Fig. 4A, B and D; Movie S7 and 8).

However, there was a change in macrophage behavior and morphology, as it was previously observed in larvae fed HFD alone (Fig. 2A, B and E; Movie S6).

In HCC larvae, HFD induced a shift in behavior from the patrolling macrophages to a more stationary phenotype (Movie S7 and 8).

The diet also induced a rounder and larger macrophage morphology (Fig. 4A, B and E; Movie S8).

As for neutrophils, neutrophil density was significantly increased with the diet (Fig. 4A, C and F; Movie S8).

Adaptive immune cells also play an important role in hepatocarcinogenesis.36,37

To further characterize the immune response in this NASH-associated HCC model, we used a transgenic line with labeled T cells, Tg(cd4.1:mCherry)/(lck:egfp) to compare the effects of a conventional and HFD (Table S1).

Surprisingly, in HCC + HFD larvae, T cell density was reduced in the liver area in comparison to HCC siblings (Fig. 4G and H).

Interestingly, the same effect was observed in control larvae fed with this diet (Fig. S6C).

Overall, these data show that the inflammatory response is triggered early in HCC, but when combined with a NAFLD model, the presence of lipid accumulation significantly alters the innate and adaptive immune response in the tumor microenvironment during the early progression phase of HCC in zebrafish.

SECTION

HFD induces pro-inflammatory macrophage polarization in zebrafish HCC

PARAGRAPH

Live imaging revealed a change in macrophage morphology and dynamic behavior in HCC larvae in the presence of a HFD.

Interestingly, we did not observe an increase in macrophage infiltration into the liver with a change in diet.

To determine if this change in macrophage morphology is associated with altered polarization of the macrophages we utilized a reporter of TNFα expression, Tg(tnfa:egfp) (Table S1), to identify pro-inflammatory macrophages in the liver.

TNFα is an important marker of macrophage polarization to a pro-inflammatory phenotype, classically referred to as a M1 macrophage, and has been used in zebrafish to identify these macrophage sub-populations.38

It is important to note that other cells in the liver can express TNFα including hepatocytes.39

However, pro-inflammatory subsets of hepatic macrophages are the main source of TNFα in the liver in NAFLD/NASH disease.40,41

To address macrophage polarization, we crossed the zebrafish HCC model to the TNFα reporter line.

We found increased numbers of TNFα-positive macrophages in HCC + HFD compared to HCC control (Fig. 5A-D).

The same effect was observed in control larvae fed with HFD (Fig. S6D).

Taken together, our findings suggest that HFD induces pro-inflammatory macrophage polarization in the liver during early HCC.

SECTION

Macrophages are necessary for progression of HCC induced by diet

PARAGRAPH

To further address the role of macrophages in the HCC + HFD phenotype, we outcrossed the HCC line with a transgenic line that allows for 80–90% depletion of macrophages, Tg(mpeg1: NTR-eYFP) (Table S1), with metronidazole (MTZ) treatment.42

We began MTZ treatment at 4 dpf to ablate macrophages before we introduced the HFD.

Using liver growth as an indicator of disease progression, we found that macrophage ablation reduced liver size to control levels in the HCC + HFD larvae (Fig. 5E and F).

Surprisingly, macrophage ablation affected liver size in HCC + HFD larvae but not in HCC or HFD alone (Fig. S7B and C).

Taken together, our findings suggest that macrophages, and specifically macrophage polarization, play a key role in the early progression of NAFLD/NASH-associated HCC in larval zebrafish.

SECTION

Metformin inhibits diet-induced progression specifically in NASH-associated HCC

PARAGRAPH

Metformin is a drug that induces AMPK activation and is being used to treat diabetes and NAFLD.17,43,44

Metformin can also reduce HCC incidence in obese/diabetic patients.17

However, the role of metformin in treating HCC remains unclear.19

We therefore sought to determine if metformin was able to reduce HCC progression in NASH-associated HCC in larval zebrafish.

Interestingly, metformin treatment of HCC + HFD larvae reduced liver size to levels similar to HCC alone (Fig. 6A and D), suggesting a reduction of NASH-associated HCC progression.

No change was observed in HCC larvae treated with metformin in the presence of a normal diet (Fig. 6A and D).

Next, we addressed if metformin was able to reverse the malignant cellular and nuclear changes enhanced by HFD in HCC larvae (Fig. 3G-L).

We found HCC + HFD larvae treated with metformin had a significant decrease in hepatocyte area and increase in nuclear circularity (Fig. 6B, C, E and F).

Although a trend toward a decrease N:C ratio was noted in HCC larvae fed with HFD treated with metformin, no significant changes were observed (Fig. 6B and G).

In addition, metformin significantly reduced the incidence of micronuclei and nuclear herniation in HCC + HFD larvae (Fig. 6B, C and H).

Interestingly, metformin had no effect on any of the malignant features measured in HCC larvae alone (Fig. 6B-H).

Altogether, these data suggest that metformin might be a useful therapeutic approach to specifically treat NASH-associated HCC progression.

SECTION

Metformin reverses HFD effect on liver tumorigenesis and decreases inflammation and restores T cells in NASH-associated HCC larvae

PARAGRAPH

Metformin has tumor-suppressive effects by inhibiting angiogenesis and proliferation.15

Metformin also decreases steatosis and lipotoxicity associated with high fat intake.43

To determine the effect of metformin on the TME of NASH-associated HCC larvae we measured vessel formation, steatosis, lipotoxicity and proliferation.

We found that metformin reverses the diet-induced increase in vessel formation, steatosis, lipotoxicity and proliferation in HCC + HFD larvae (Fig. 7A-H).

Metformin treatment is also reported to reduce inflammation and modulates macrophage polarization in vitro.45,46

Accordingly, we found that metformin treated HCC + HFD larvae had a reduced density of TNFα-positive cells and neutrophils (Fig. 8A-D).

Interestingly, metformin also reversed the inhibitory effect of diet on T cell recruitment to the liver (Fig. 8E-F).

These data suggest that metformin reduces diet-induced increases in angiogenesis, steatosis, lipotoxicity and non-resolving inflammation and restores T cell infiltration and potentially surveillance.

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

HCC incidence is increasing worldwide, particularly NASH-associated HCC.

Unfortunately, treatments for HCC are limited.

A better understanding of the cellular and molecular players in the liver TME is crucial to identify therapeutics to treat the different types of HCC.

It is particularly important to understand the effect of a Western diet on factors that affect the risk of uncontrolled inflammation that occur in NASH, which can enhance liver tumorigenesis but also alters patient’s response to therapy.

A key gap is the ability to live image intercellular interactions within the liver microenvironment that mediate inflammation and contribute to disease progression.

Here we employ tools to visualize features of disease progression and inflammation phenotypes in real time in zebrafish NAFLD/NASH and HCC larval models.

We also probe the effect of the drug metformin on inflammation and progression in NASH-associated HCC.

PARAGRAPH

Our findings demonstrate that a HFD exacerbates larval HCC including increasing liver size and angiogenesis.

These findings are consistent with previous reports showing increased angiogenesis in NASH,29–31 although here we show increased angiogenesis at early stages after introduction of a HFD.

Importantly, a HFD also induced alterations in nuclear parameters associated with malignancy during early progression in this HCC model.

Most notably, a HFD induced the increased formation of micronuclei, indicating DNA damage, likely associated with lipotoxicity and an increase in oxidative stress.47

To our knowledge this is the first time that these changes have been visualized in vivo, and after short a duration of a HFD, suggesting that short-term dietary changes can enhance hepatocarcinogenesis.

PARAGRAPH

Myeloid cell infiltration has been associated with HCC in humans and in experimental models, but not previously in this zebrafish model of β-catenin induced carcinogenesis, in particular at this stage of progression.22

This pro-inflammatory phenotype is likely an early driver of the malignant process.

Neutrophils can be pro-tumorigenic and enhance hepatocarcinogenesis48 by releasing growth factors that promote angiogenesis and tumor proliferation,49 or chemotactic cues that modulate recruitment and polarization of macrophages and regulatory T cells.50

Increasing neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratios have been associated with poor prognosis in patients with HCC and are being used as a prognostic factor.51

In addition to the increased liver neutrophil infiltration, NASH-associated HCC larvae also had a decrease in the total number of T cells suggesting that diet may modulate T cell numbers in the liver and potentially tumor surveillance.

Interestingly, this effect on T cells is consistent with what was reported by Ma et al.14 showing that NAFLD limits liver tumor T cell surveillance in a mouse model because of reduced numbers of CD4+ T lymphocytes.

PARAGRAPH

Our finding that a HFD induces changes in macrophage polarization into a pro-inflammatory TNFα-positive population without affecting overall cell number is intriguing.

TNFα is a key inflammatory component associated with lipotoxicity in NASH-associated HCC progression.52–54

This pro-inflammatory cytokine not only serves as a key mediator of hepatocyte apoptosis resulting in liver damage but also plays an important role in cellular proliferation leading to liver regeneration or hepatocarcinogenesis.39

Indeed, we observed that a HFD induced proliferation in the liver of both control and HCC larvae.

Several cells in the liver can express TNFα, including hepatic macrophages, neutrophils, dendritic cells, natural killer cells, lymphoid cells, endothelial cells and fibroblasts.39,55

However, pro-inflammatory hepatic macrophages are the main source of TNFα in liver in NAFLD/NASH disease,40,41 consistent with our findings.

It has been reported by others that pro-inflammatory sets of macrophages and Kupffer cells play a major role in liver disease progression,56 specially in NAFLD/NASH.12.

Macrophage activation in the liver occurs through sensing of a wide variety of signals such as HMGB1, ATP, IL1β or reactive oxygen species that are released from damaged hepatocytes due to lipotoxicity.57

In the case of HCC, tumor-associated macrophages can play dual functional roles by clearing premalignant senescent hepatocytes and preventing progression to HCC or by providing tumorigenic signals which drive HCC progression.57

In our NAFLD/NASH-associated HCC zebrafish model, macrophage depletion also decreased HCC progression.

Surprisingly, our data identified macrophages as key modulators of NAFLD/NASH-associated HCC progression in zebrafish but not for HCC alone.

Overall, tumor-associated macrophage infiltration is generally associated with poor prognosis in HCC and can contribute to HCC progression by promoting proliferation, angiogenesis and later metastasis.7,11,57

In the future it will be important to determine what macrophage-derived signals are involved in HCC progression to enable potential macrophage-specific drug targets for the treatment of NAFLD/NASH-associated HCC.

PARAGRAPH

Metformin is mainly used as an anti-diabetic drug17 and in recent years, this drug has gained attention due to its pleiotropic effect and lower cancer incidence in treated patients17.

Metformin may have tumor-suppressive therapeutic effects for HCC and other cancers15,17 due to its inhibitory effects on inflammation, oxidative stress and angiogenesis,58,59 in addition to inducing autophagy or apoptosis.60

Several in vivo and in vitro studies have supported the clinical use of metformin to treat HCC, althought its role in vivo is still unclear.19

Our data suggest that the effect of metformin on HCC progression may depend on the type of HCC.

In NASH-associated HCC in zebrafish, metformin abrogated the effect of a HFD on HCC progression.

Importantly, the inhibitory effect of metformin in NASH-associated HCC larvae was associated with decreased inflammation and hepatocyte proliferation, as well as affecting micronuclei formation.

Metformin can antagonize cancer cell proliferation by multiple mechanisms including inhibition of mTOR signalling,58 suppressing mitochondrial-dependent metabolic intermediates,16,61 or indirectly through its effects on inflammation.

Several studies have shown that metformin induces a downregulation in TNFα and hypoxia-inducible factor 1α, which can limit angiogenesis.58

We found that metformin modulates the TME immune cell composition in the NASH-associated HCC zebrafish by reducing diet-induced non-resolving inflammation and increasing T cell infiltration.

These data are in accordance with the literature, which shows that increased AMPK activity inhibits NF-κB and IL-6/STAT3 signaling activity suppressesing inflammation in the liver.20

In the future, it will be interesting to determine if neutrophils and macrophages are involved in the effect of diet on liver tumor surveillance, and how metformin modulates this process.

PARAGRAPH

In summary, these data suggest that a HFD induces a non-resolving inflammatory microenvironment in HCC, decreasing tumor surveillance and accelerating liver tumorigenesis in a zebrafish model of NASH-associated HCC.

Indeed, our findings show that metformin, a drug known to modulate macrophage polarization and reduce lipotoxicity in hepatocytes, provides beneficial effects in limiting inflammation and potentially restoring tumor surveillance in NASH-associated HCC zebrafish larvae.

In the future, metformin might be a useful therapeutic approach to specifically target NASH-associated HCC and decrease diet-enhanced hepatocarcinogenesis.

SECTION

Financial support

PARAGRAPH

AH was funded by NCI CA085862; SdO is supported by EMBO ALTF 620-2015 and Cancer Research Institute (USA)/Fibrolamellar Cancer Foundation (USA); NG is supported by Molecular Biosciences Training Grant T32-GM07215 and Laboratory for Optical and Computational Instrumentation and the Morgridge Institute for Research (KE); VM is supported by American Heart Association (USA) (17POST33410970)

SECTION

Conflict of interest

PARAGRAPH

The authors declare no conflicts of interest that pertain to this work.

PARAGRAPH

Please refer to the accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.

SECTION

Authors’ contributions

PARAGRAPH

Conceived and designed experiments: SDO and AH.

Performed experiments: SDO, RAH, AG, NG, BGK and VM.

Performed analysis: SDO, RAH, AG and VM.

Wrote the manuscript: SDO and AH.

Critically reviewed and edited the manuscript: RAH, NG, VM and AH.