10.1016/j.jasrep.2018.10.025

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Geochemical analysis and spatial trends of ceramics and clay from Angamuco, Michoacán

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

An enduring question in studies of empire formation is the role of local and regional political economies throughout broader political fluctuations (Brumfiel and Earle, 1987; Costin and Hagstrum, 1995; Hirth, 2009; Roux, 2003; Sinopoli, 2003).

This question is particularly salient in Postclassic (c. 900–1530 CE) central-western Mexico, where the Purépecha Empire is thought to have operated via a top-down centralized political, economic, and social system beginning in the fourteenth century CE (e.g. Pollard, 2008; Smith and Berdan, 2003).

There is limited scholarly attention to the Purépecha compared to central and southeastern Mesoamerican societies, and additional work is necessary to evaluate the impacts of the emerging empire on new subjects.

Previous research indicates that the idea of a centralized empire may have been more complicated in terms of resource control and distribution (Cohen, 2016; Hirshman, 2008; Hirshman et al., 2010), but that some top-down control over metal and obsidian resources likely occurred (Maldonado, 2008; Pollard, 2016; Rebnegger, 2010; Walton, 2017).

Although the study of regional political economies and the role of tribute have been important in Purépecha archaeology, there has been less attention to local political economies at one site.

PARAGRAPH

Our study uses data derived from compositional analysis (Instrumental Neutron Activation Analysis, or INAA) to evaluate what geochemical differences – if any – are visible in ceramic pastes from one site in the Purépecha imperial heartland.

Such a localized approach is important for assessing variation in paste composition, and the data can help determine if there are any differences in paste recipes over time and throughout site areas.

Potential changes in paste recipes could reflect reorganization of production, differential access to resources, and preferential use of resources for particular ceramic forms or styles.

Our sample includes excavated ceramic fragments and raw clays from the ancient city of Angamuco, located in the southeastern portion of the Lake Pátzcuaro Basin in Michoacán (Fig. 1).

Angamuco was occupied before and throughout the development of the Purépecha Empire (1350–1530 CE) and is thus a critical case study for evaluating the impacts of political change on ceramic manufacturing and consumption.

Archaeological and geological samples were submitted for INAA and analyzed to evaluate: 1) whether geochemically distinctive clays and paste recipes were used by potters at Angamuco; 2) whether these varied temporally and spatially across the site; 3) how the Angamuco pottery compares with other known datasets.

PARAGRAPH

Ceramic archaeometric approaches such as INAA have long been used to assess the provenance of ancient manufacturing techniques (Bishop, 2014; Bishop et al., 1982; Harbottle, 1976).

Any discussion of INAA data is strengthened by considering the ceramic ecology of the natural source material environment, including available clays, tempers, water, and fuel (Arnold, 1988; Galaty, 1999; Matson, 1965).

This is an important line of evidence that can evaluate whether and how the raw materials and technologies available to potters were used for the finished product.

INAA consists of bombarding ceramic sherd and clay samples with neutrons and measuring the emitting gamma rays as amounts of elements in each sample (reported in parts per million or parts per billion).

For ancient ceramics, INAA is among the best techniques to establish a centralized comparative dataset because of its accuracy, precision, and replicability (Bishop et al., 1982; Glascock et al. 2007; Glascock and Neff, 2003; Neff, 2000; Rice, 1987, pp. 374–375; Stoner and Glascock, 2012).

Throughout the Americas, studies of ceramic chemical composition are used to infer interregional trade (e.g. Huster, 2018; Minc, 2009; Nichols et al., 2002) and state-sponsored and/or local production (Hayashida, 1999) during broader political changes.

INAA data are an important step for establishing general differences in paste composition at one site in time and space.

SECTION

Geochemistry in Central-Western Mexico

PARAGRAPH

Geochemical analysis has not been conducted previously at Angamuco and the results of this study may be compared to other work in the Lake Pátzcuaro Basin and in central-western Mexico.

Ceramic archaeometry in Purépecha archaeology is relatively limited compared to other parts of Mesoamerica, though a few recent studies provide a foundation for such research in the region (Hirshman, 2003, 2008; Hirshman and Ferguson, 2012; Pollard et al., 2005; Pollard et al., 2001).

At Angamuco, petrographic analysis of ceramics and clay indicate that potters likely exploited local mineral-rich clay sources, adding various tempers, and generating numerous, complex paste recipes (see Cohen et al., 2018).

The mineral data show that multiple small-scale producers structured pottery production at the site, and that techniques of manufacture likely remained relatively stable over long periods.

These petrographic data also represent a subsample of the INAA samples discussed here, and the results of this study will be compared in a broader analysis of Angamuco production and consumption.

PARAGRAPH

Fortunately, there has been some compositional work done in the Pátzcuaro area.

One project has geochemically characterized 36 clay samples from several different areas of the lake basin and 171 sherds (56 from surface survey of Tzintzuntzan; 115 from stratified excavations at Urichu and Erongaricuaro) (Hirshman, 2003, 2008; Hirshman and Ferguson, 2012).

Based on the INAA results, the researchers argue that compositional variability differs over time at the three sites and that clay and ash recipes may have structured ceramic production between the Preclassic and Postclassic periods (50–1521 CE).

Although clays and ash were not sampled from the Angamuco site area in that study, the previous research will be compared to the results below.

Other related archaeometric analyses have been undertaken on ceramic samples from the Zacapu Basin malpaís sites (Jadot, 2016; Jadot et al., 2016), though INAA-derived data are restricted to the Pátzcuaro area.

SECTION

Environmental context

PARAGRAPH

Angamuco is in the southeastern portion of the Lake Pátzcuaro Basin, which is in the active Michoacán-Guanajuato Volcanic Field (Fig. 1).

The base of the lake basin was formed by Miocene andesites derived from semi-shield volcanoes, ashes, gravel, and breccia from the El Metate volcano and faulting roughly 700,000 years ago (Chevrel et al., 2015).

During the Early Pleistocene, the lake basin was formed by basaltic-andesite lavas that dammed the proto-Balsas River and resulted in substantial faulting (Fisher, 2000; Guilbaud et al., 2011).

Sediments and soils within the Pátzcuaro Basin are derived from two different parent materials: uirás consists of thick deposits of diatomite combined with tuff from Tertiary stratovolcanoes (Israde-Alcántara et al., 2005); the second parent material can be characterized as ash, breccia, and other pyroclastic material over volcanic bedrock (Fisher, 2000, p. 53).

A recent overview of the lake basin geology is available in Cohen et al., 2018.

PARAGRAPH

The soils at Angamuco can be characterized by the existing soils classification from elsewhere in the lake basin.

The site is situated on the lower slopes of a densely-forested woodland zone on Pleistocene to Early Holocene era lava flow episodes (malpaís) that formed lower (2100–2180 masl) and upper (2180–2400 masl) occupation areas (VH.

Garduño-Monroy 2018, personal communication).

Purépecha residents within the lake basin today use a tri-partite soil classification system that correlates directly to those identified for the region in the FAO-UNESCO system (Barrera-Bassols, 1988; Barrera-Bassols and Zinck, 2003; Toledo, 1991).

The local taxonomy is based on a multidimensional assessment of the landscape, including productive potential for food, materials for construction and ceramics, and other social purposes (e.g. medicine; ritual; magic).

Lake basin residents recognize five major soil or ‘soil cover’ (echeri in Purépecha) types: dusty soils (echeri t'upúri), clayey soils (echeri charánda), sandy soils (echeri kutzari), gravelly soils (echeri tzacapendini), and hard soapy soils (echeri querekua).

These soils can be further subdivided into 15 subtypes and eight varieties based on textural and color differences in the upper 45 cm (Barrera-Bassols and Zinck, 2003: Fig. 9).

Soils are also distinguished by their position on the landscape and proximity to neighboring landscapes, among other considerations.

At Angamuco, the dominant soil throughout the site is charanda, which developed from the weathering of volcanic rock in a climate characterized by warm summers, mild winters, and broad-leaf vegetation (Gorenstein and Pollard, 1983, Appx.

1).

This soil can be used for agriculture, but only after the rainy season has begun in late May and early June since it does not retain moisture.

PARAGRAPH

During a high stand, the level of Lake Pátzcuaro could be as close as 1.5 km west of the closest section of the Angamuco malpaís.

Today the site is at least 11 km from the current lake extent.

A spring on the western side of the malpaís is still in use and floods during the rainy season (late May–October).

Geomorphological studies are analyzing features that may have seasonally held water around the Angamuco malpaís.

Other sources of water on the malpaís likely came from hand-dug circular wells documented throughout the site, and water held in sinkholes and depressions on the upper part of the site, such as the rejolladas (sink holes) and rock cavities documented in the Maya region (Fedick, 2014; Weiss-Krejci and Sabbas, 2002).

SECTION

Materials and methods

PARAGRAPH

Samples subjected to INAA include 30 clay briquettes and 300 sherds.

Briquettes were formed from 30 clay samples that were collected on or near Angamuco.

Sherds were selected from a population of 5634 sherds which were sampled for attribute analysis from the total number of excavated Angamuco ceramics (n = ~66,426).

Sherds were selected from all seven excavation areas (A-G) and all strata that included identifiable forms and/or decorated examples (see Cohen, 2016:109–112 and Tables 1–2 in Cohen and Pierce, submitted for elaboration).

Details about the clay and sherd sampling strategies are discussed below.

SECTION

Clay sampling

PARAGRAPH

The 30 clay samples were collected from excavation units at Angamuco and from exposed profiles and likely reservoirs within proximity to the site (Fig. 2).

Clays were formed via diagenesis through the weathering of volcanic ash along with colluvial processes.

We focused on nearby sources, since extant clays presumably would have been available to Pre-hispanic potters.

Ethnographic observations in the Pátzcuaro area and elsewhere also indicate that there is a 60–70% chance that potters will walk no more than 9–11 km for clay (Arnold, 2005; Foster, 1955; Foster, 1948; Levine et al., 2015).

Sample locations were recorded using a GPS, and photographs of the soil profile and of north, south, east, and west views were taken.

Clay was collected from a non-eroded portion of the profile (B or C horizons) whenever possible.

The depth below the surface and any contextual information were also recorded.

Clays were then made into briquettes and all samples were submitted for INAA at the University of Missouri Research Reactor (MURR) (see Figs. 2–3 in Cohen and Pierce, submitted).

SECTION

Description of clay sampling locations

PARAGRAPH

Most of the clays were collected close to the Angamuco malpaís (Table 1, Fig. 2).

Sample 1 is from a cut along the paved Sanabria-Chapultepec carretera to the northwest of the malpaís.

Much of the profile contained eroded material.

Samples 2, 3, and 4 are from nearby sediment profiles along a dirt road used by local ejido (cooperative farming community) residents in the northwestern portion of the Angamuco malpaís.

Samples 5 and 6 are from another local dirt road on the northeastern portion of the site while samples 7 and 8 are from profiles further to the northeast along the same road.

Samples 9 through 14 were collected from south of the site, mainly from ditches and exposed profiles that may have been part of ancient reservoirs.

Specifically, samples 9 and 10 are from ditches along the Chapultepec-Lagunillas dirt road; sample 11 is from a culvert excavation; sample 12 is from the el Alamo barranca off of the Chapulltepec-Lagunillas dirt road; sample 13 is from the base of Cerro Colorado, a currently mined hill that is immediately south of Angamuco.

Sample 14 was collected from the surface of a recent cut that was being used for new road construction.

Due to the construction activities for the creation of the Autopista Siglo XXI toll road (Cuota 14D) between the cities of Morelia and Pátzcuaro, clay from this sample was eroded.

PARAGRAPH

Sample 15 is from the eastern base of Cerro Chapultepec, a hill to the west of Angamuco that was also impacted by the road construction.

Sample 16 is from an exposed profile at the base of a hill located near the town of Corrales, approximately 250 m to the west of Angamuco (see Fig. 2 in Cohen and Pierce, submitted).

Samples 17 through 20 were all collected on the western/southwestern side of Angamuco from cumulic soils adjacent to an active spring used as a cattle tank.

Samples 21 and 22 are from seasonally inundated areas with cumulic soils.

Samples 23 and 24 are from the northern profile of Cerro Colorado and from marshy deposits at the base of the same hill respectively.

Samples 25 and 26 are from a drainage and construction cut within the Fontezuelas ejido town center, approximately 1.5 km to the east of Angamuco.

Samples 27 is from an exposed profile near the Quiroga road exit to the town of Las Pilas 5–6 km to the east of Angamuco, while sample 28 is from a construction cut on the paved road towards Las Pilas (on or near Route 15).

Finally, samples 29 and 30 are from excavation units at the site: 29 is from 0.75 m below the surface in unit DN0E2 in Area D, a raised plaza to the north of a pyramid; 30 is from approximately 1.10 m below the surface of unit CN12W2 in Area C, or the pyramid and cemetery area at the site.

SECTION

Sherd selection

PARAGRAPH

The 300 sherds used in this study were derived from different socio-functional excavation areas at Angamuco (Table 2).

From the total attribute sample, 300 excavated sherds were selected for INAA at MURR, based on their variability throughout the areas, contexts, and formal and decorative traits.

Stratified random sampling ensured that the sherds crosscut different socio-functional areas and decorative and formal classes when possible (see Cohen, 2016, pp. 173–180).

Since these sherds were exported out of Mexico, sample selection was restricted by two factors: 1) export laws prohibit the transport of rims or other diagnostic forms (supports, handles) for destructive analysis and we were thus relegated to body sherds which reduced the number of forms that we could identify; 2) we selected sherds that were larger than 2 cm to break as a potential petrographic specimen.

Vessel forms were identifiable on a small number (n = 101) of the assemblage based on comparisons to published materials in central-western Mesoamerica (e.g. Jadot, 2016; Macías Goytia, 2005; Michelet, 2013; Pereira, 2013; Pollard, 1993, Pollard, 1972, p. 197; Ramírez Urrea and Cárdenas, 2006).

The limited number of form identification is due to fragmentation, the export constraints, and the preliminary nature of ceramic analysis at Angamuco.

SECTION

Description of sherd sampling locations

PARAGRAPH

Radiocarbon determinations and artifact classifications indicate that Angamuco was occupied at least between the Early Classic through Late Postclassic periods (250–1530 CE), but areas of the site were occupied most intensively during different periods (Cohen, 2016, pp. 159–164; Fisher et al., 2016, Fisher et al., 2013).

Excavation areas A, B, C, and D are below 2100 masl of the site, and human bone and artifacts predominantly date to the Middle to Late Postclassic periods (1200–1530 CE).

Area A was a residential complex with rooms, patios, terraces, and artifacts such as polychrome spouted vessels and metal that represent elite Purépecha occupations.

Sherds were sampled from all room and patio contexts in Area A. Limited evidence from human bone suggests an earlier Classic period occupation and sherds were sampled from context.

Area B was a large building with ceramic and lithic materials, though a longer occupation was likely based on some earlier artifact identifications.

Sherds were sampled from excavation units located both inside and outside of the Area B structure to evaluate any variation in ceramic production throughout the context.

Excavation Areas C and D consisted of a Purépecha style pyramid (yácata), an adjacent open plaza with dozens of burials, two altars, and other large buildings and rooms.

Excavations and additional unit sampling within these areas revealed artifacts such as polychrome vessels and metal to be primarily from the Late Postclassic Period.

This is further supported by AMS dating determinations of human bone.

Samples of sherds from all C and D contexts – including burials from the open plaza and associated altar, an adjacent built-up plaza area, and a shallow room – were submitted for INAA.

Area C was likely used in the Middle Postclassic period as well based on some ceramic identifications, but sherds were sampled from clear Late Postclassic contexts.

PARAGRAPH

In the upper (2120–2280 masl) portions of the Angamuco, ceramic samples were selected from Early to Middle Postclassic period (900–1350 CE) areas E, F, and G. Area E was comprised of sunken plazas, associated rooms, and terraces.

Sherds for INAA were sampled from all excavation units in this area.

The final sample cluster was from Areas F and G, on the eastern side of the malpaís.

Approximately 250 m from one another, Area F consisted of a rubble-filled mound in an open plaza that was surrounded by habitation terraces and other features such as rooms and walls.

Area G includes a series of rooms and associated patios next to a terraced hill facing Cerro Colorado.

During excavation, we sampled two plazas, two rooms, and several terrace contexts.

Most artifacts can be associated with the Middle Postclassic period.

There were few artifacts recovered here relative to units sampled elsewhere at the site, and many of the artifacts were eroded.

Consequently, only four sherds from this area were sampled for INAA.

SECTION

INAA methods

PARAGRAPH

Samples were prepared according to standard MURR protocol published elsewhere (see Glascock, 1992).

Fragments of about 1 cm2 were removed from each sample and abraded using a silicon carbide burr to remove glaze, slip, paint, and adhering soil, to avoid contamination.

Two analytical samples were prepared from each source specimen.

Portions of approximately 150 mg of powder were weighed for short irradiations while 200 mg of each sample was used for long irradiations.

The Angamuco samples were prepared along with Standards made from the National Institute of Standards and Technology, including SRM-1633a (coal fly ash) and SRM-688 (basalt rock), in addition to quality control samples of SRM-278 (obsidian rock) and Ohio Red Clay in a manner consistent with MURR protocol.

PARAGRAPH

The MURR analyses produced elemental concentration values for 33 elements in most of the samples.

Nickel was removed from all statistical techniques due to the high number of missing values within the dataset.

Statistical analysis was carried out on base-10 logarithms of concentrations on the remaining elements to compensate for differences in magnitude between the major elements such as calcium and trace elements such as the rare earth or lanthanide elements (e.g. lanthium and cerium).

Base-10 logarithms also yield a more normal distribution for many of the trace elements, facilitating a more robust analysis.

PARAGRAPH

The purpose of conducting compositional analysis on ceramic artifacts is to identify distinct and relatively homogeneous groups within the analytical database based upon elemental frequencies (Baxter et al., 2008; Bieber et al., 1976; Glascock, 1992; Harbottle, 1976; Neff et al., 1988).

These compositional groups can be graphically viewed as “centers of mass” which can each be assumed to represent geographically restricted sources and/or paste recipes (Bishop et al., 1982; Glowacki and Neff, 2002; Weigand et al., 1977).

Cluster analysis (CA), principal components analysis (PCA), and discriminant analysis (DA) using MURR Statistical Routines through GAUSS software were used to identify patterns in the multivariate elemental clustering.

First, hierarchical CA was used to identify groups of compositionally related samples.

Four rough groups were identified.

This was followed by PCA to define and maximize the sources of variation between specimens.

The principal components were then exploited for more refined group discrimination through visual inspection of PC loading plots in adherence to the provenance postulate (Weigand et al., 1977), which necessitates that the differences between sources exceed differences within them.

Informed by the results of the PCA, the intersections of individual elements were projected through bivariate plots to better visually assess group membership and to make final group adjustments.

Finally, bootstrapped Mahalanobis distance calculations were used to test each group member for robustness.

PARAGRAPH

The Angamuco compositional groups were then visually compared to groups previously identified from other assemblages in the region (e.g. Hirshman and Ferguson, 2012) through the inspection of bivariate and PC loading plots.

Again using MURR Statistical Routines for calculating Mahalanobis and the Mean Euclidian distances, the Angamuco samples were statistically compared to these data as well as samples from beyond the immediate region.

The thirty raw clay samples included in the Angamuco assemblage as well as a collection of raw clays from the Lake Pátzcuaro vicinity were also projected onto compositional groups to directly compare the Angamuco sample to the Lake Pátzcuaro Basin sample (Hirshman and Ferguson, 2012).

SECTION

Results

SECTION

Clay samples

PARAGRAPH

Given the nature of bulk techniques such as INAA, it can be difficult to compare raw clays to archaeological ceramics compositionally.

Temper added during ceramic production, for example, can alter the compositional makeup of the sample to an unknown degree.

Further, while lithic sources tend to be more localized and homogenous, the ubiquity of ceramic raw materials typically makes it impossible to sample all potential “sources” intensively enough to create groups to which sherds can be compared.

In other words, the range of compositional variation is often unknown for any particular clay source area.

We can gain some insight into a general range of variation, however, by analyzing clays collected from the same region.

PARAGRAPH

Within the Angamuco vicinity, thirty samples were collected from local raw clay deposits in the area and subjected to INAA.

Using these analyses, comparisons with clays previously collected from the area around Lake Pátzcuaro reveal little compositional difference between the assemblages.

While some elements (e.g. Yb and Tb) differ slightly between the two areas, the average values of each element do not differ by one standard deviation between the datasets (Table 3).

Furthermore, in both assemblages, the individual standard deviation is at least 20% or more of the mean elemental value for most of the cases.

This indicates that there is little compositional homogeneity within each of the areas individually, but also that there is no significant difference between them.

This could be a product of the regional geology as clay deposits originate from a limited number of parent materials discussed above (Cohen et al., 2018; Fisher, 2000; Israde-Alcántara et al., 2005).

Given that the provenance postulate dictates that compositional homogeneity must be greater within sources than between them for the identification of archaeological sample provenance (Weigand et al., 1977), using these clays alone to differentiate production locales between the areas can be problematic.

Therefore, we must rely more upon other means such as the criterion of abundance (Bishop et al., 1982) and knowledge of the archaeological sample itself to best assess local production.

PARAGRAPH

Focusing exclusively on the Angamuco sample, we also used ArcMap 10.3.1 to map compositional variability of raw clays to assess more localized compositional differences in deposits.

Using a GIS, we visually assessed the spatial patterns of elemental variability.

For example, are there trends of increasing proportions of any element north to south?

The results of this spatial analysis showed no clear spatial trends with any single element, however (see Fig 4 in Cohen and Pierce, submitted).

Thus, even a more localized sampling of raw clay deposits including thirty specimens from within a 5-km radius show a random distribution of elements.

Therefore, not only is there little homogeneity within the area, but samples collected adjacent to each other are just as variable as those collected at more distant locations.

For this reason, when considering Angamuco ceramics, we have examined the assemblage in isolation to identify internal compositional patterns reflecting distinct paste recipes, rather than differential production locales.

SECTION

Potsherds

PARAGRAPH

We identified four compositional groups within the Angamuco assemblage.

Group A (n = 122) is the largest of the groups.

Compared to the other samples in this assemblage, it is relatively homogenous and tightly clustered (Fig. 3).

Specimens in this group are comparatively high in Sodium (Na), Scandium (Sc), and Iron (Fe).

Of the 32 sherds in which form could be identified, they are nearly evenly split between bowls and jars.

This group also includes one grater and one brasero (incense burner) sherd (Table 4).

As such, within this sample, the group A paste does not appear to be relegated to ceramics of a specific function.

The largest number of samples from this group were found in Area C (n = 35), though this group was also dominant in Area F (n = 33) and in Area A (n = 27) (Table 5).

PARAGRAPH

Upon comparison to archival data, this group is nearly identical to a large group identified by Hirshman and Ferguson (2012) as the “Main Group” [Fig. 5].

In their analysis, they have suggested that this compositional group originated in the southwestern portion of the Lake Pátzcuaro Basin due to comparison with raw clay samples.

More specifically, they suggest a possible production locale in the proximity of the site of Erongaricuaro based upon the Criterion of Abundance (Bishop et al., 1982).

In our analysis, this compositional group accounts for nearly one third of the samples at Angamuco.

It is possible that multiple sites were accessing the same raw material deposits.

It is also possible that there was a production locale at Erongaricuaro or the western side of the lake basin, but it is unclear whether these potters were exporting many vessels to the eastern side of the lake basin.

Rather, it may be more appropriate to think in terms of very broad resource areas due to the generally similar chemistry across the southern half of the lake basin (see also Hirshman and Ferguson, 2012, pp. 3203, 3205).

As demonstrated above, the lake basin chemistry may be so similar that we are unable to differentiate specific source locales through chemistry alone.

As spatial mapping of individual elements has yet to reveal any clear patterning in which more specific resource procurement areas can be identified, the argument for general basin homogeneity is even more likely.

Nonetheless, we can conclude that the largest of the groups from Angamuco is indistinguishable from the Main Group in Hirshman and Ferguson's (2012) previous study (Fig. 5), and regardless of precise raw material procurement area, these ceramics were likely produced locally due to the Criterion of Abundance (Bishop et al., 1982).

PARAGRAPH

Group B (n = 52) is easily distinguishable from other paste recipes in the PC plot and comparatively low in elements such as Samarium (Sm), Hafnium (Hf), Cerium (Ce), Manganese (Mn), and Tantalum (Ta), while comparatively high in Calcium (Ca) and Strontium (Sr).

Unlike the first group, this recipe does appear to be related to form.

Over 92% of the identifiable forms are bowl fragments, with only two jars present.

Of the 52 samples assigned to this group, the majority (n = 28) were identified in Area C, while smaller numbers appeared in Areas A (n = 6), B (n = 6), D (n = 3), E (n = 5), F (n = 3), and G (n = 1).

PARAGRAPH

Despite the seeming compositional homogeneity of the lake basin, this group is unlike the previously analyzed samples from anywhere in the basin, nor is it like any raw clay samples from near Angamuco or elsewhere.

In a further attempt to identify chemically similar specimens in the broader region, we also compared this group to the entirety of the MURR database using a Euclidian distance search.

The specimens with the greatest similarity were exceedingly diverse and no one location featured similar sherds exclusively.

Rather, the specimens that were the most similar based upon multivariate Euclidean distance were collected from a wide array of locales, including sites within the Toluca Valley, Veracruz, and the Basin of Mexico.

With such wide-ranging results, it is a near certainty that similarities are nonetheless coincidental and provide no evidence towards exotic origin.

Thus, this compositional group is unique in comparison to all available INAA data.

The inability to identify similar specimens in the vicinity or beyond its ubiquity at Angamuco sites, and its dissimilarity with Lake Patzcuaro specimens deem local production likely.

Yet another possibility is that these vessels may have held distinctive contents; residue analysis on Group B specimens may be useful for further evaluation of this group.

PARAGRAPH

Group C (n = 41) is the smallest of the groups but is easily distinguishable by numerous elements.

Concentrations of Rubidium (Rb), Thorium (Th), and Uranium (U), among other elements, are notably higher in this group.

Compared to the rest of the assemblage, these specimens are also lower in Calcium (Ca), and Scandium (Sc).

Of the members of this group, only fourteen could be identified to form.

Of these, 100% of the sherds are bowls, in stark contrast to Group B where jars are overrepresented and only two bowls are present.

Though found in samples from all areas, Group C was most common in Area F (n = 17 or 41%) and Area A (n = 11 or 27%).

PARAGRAPH

Interestingly, this group also has a correlate with the previously analyzed lake basin sherds (Hirshman and Ferguson, 2012).

Just as Group A is compositionally indistinguishable from the “Main Group,” this group features strong similarities with the other prominent group (“Group 1”) from the region (Fig. 5).

Based upon comparisons to raw clays, Hirshman and Ferguson suggested a production locale north of Erongaricuaro (see Fig. 1).

Despite the similarities between the two archaeological assemblages, we maintain a likely local origin due to the aforementioned basin homogeneity and the relative abundance of ceramics from this group at Angamuco.

This conclusion is further substantiated by the results of recent petrographic analysis (Cohen et al., 2018) and provides additional evidence of broad regional procurement areas rather than the use of more localized raw clay deposits in the past.

PARAGRAPH

Group D (n = 43) is the most heterogeneous of all groups when considering individual elements, but more cohesive multivariately through principal components.

In general, it is higher in Cobalt (Co), Vanadium (V) and Iron (Fe), when compared to most of the assemblage.

This particular paste recipe is not associated with one ceramic form.

Rather, like Group A, this group is evenly split between bowls and jars, and features one grater and brasero sherd each.

The same number of samples (n = 12) from Areas A, C, and F were identified, and a small number were found in the Area B (n = 3), D and E (n = 2 each) specimens.

PARAGRAPH

This group also appears to be locally produced for three main reasons.

First, this is the only group that overlaps compositionally with any locally collected clay samples (n = 10).

Though the overlap between the compositional group and these ten raw clay specimens is not apparent in all forms of analysis (i.e. based upon discriminant functions; see Fig. 4), in all cases, local clays are more like Group D than any other compositional group.

Second, this compositional group does not overlap with any of the previously analyzed groups of archaeological samples from the lake basin (Hirshman and Ferguson, 2012).

Finally, its relative abundance and generally wide distribution across the site suggest widespread access rather than an exclusivity often associated with access to trade goods.

PARAGRAPH

Some specimens (n = 42 sherds) were left unassigned either because they were significantly different from all four chemical groups or they were chemically consistent with more than one group.

In some occasions, specimens were unassigned due to conflicting likelihoods based on the different analyses performed.

There is little similarity between the unassigned specimens and they likely represent a variety of paste recipes.

Fourteen of these specimens could be identified as specific forms, including nine bowls, three jars, and one grater and brasero each.

The unassigned ceramic specimens were primarily from Areas A, B, C, and D which were all elite areas occupied in part or in full during the Middle to Late Postclassic periods.

Their individual rarity, distinction from presumed local paste recipes, and association with elite contexts may indicate trade, yet their origin remains unknown.

SECTION

Discussion

SECTION

Distinctive clays and paste recipes

PARAGRAPH

Four compositional groups were identified within the Angamuco assemblage and at least ten clays from deposits adjacent to or on the site were linked with one of these groups.

(Figs. 3–5).

Most of the specimens were identifiable to one of the four groups, while one group makes up nearly one third of the entire assemblage.

The four groups can largely be discriminated by considering the first two principal components.

These two components collectively explain nearly 65% of the total variation and are largely defined by elements such as Sr, K, Na, Mn, Ca, Rb, and U.

While compositional overlap exists with specific elements or components, others are more discriminant.

With relatively few unassigned specimens (n = 42 sherds), each compositional group is unique in multiple ways.

SECTION

Intra-site variation

PARAGRAPH

All compositional groups were identified throughout the Postclassic period occupational sequence at Angamuco (Table 5).

Only one group appears in the Classic period context; however, the sample size is small and additional data are necessary to evaluate whether the lack of diversity during the Classic period is the result of sampling bias.

Although the sample sizes are larger for the Late Postclassic contexts, Angamuco potters used similar paste recipes before, during, and after the formation of the Purépecha Empire.

This means that potters did not substantially reorganize their ceramic recipes throughout broader political changes in the region.

PARAGRAPH

In terms of the relationship between paste groups and ceramic forms, there are a few patterns that should be further investigated.

Compositional Groups A and D were identified in jars, bowls, a grater, and a brasero while Groups B and C were identified primarily or exclusively in bowls.

This makes sense if we consider that Group A appears throughout the occupational sequence and Group D can be linked to local clays.

The longest lasting and/or local recipes would have been useful for different kinds of vessels.

It is possible that the recipe used to create Group A lasted so long because it was accessible to all residents regardless of socio-economic status.

Similarly, the Group D recipe shows the strongest evidence for local production and the materials would have been cheapest to acquire at the household level.

Future work will explore whether ceramics from Groups B and C are more restricted while Groups A and D are more widespread.

Finally, the preference for bowl forms in Groups B and C may indicate that the recipes were functionally appropriate for the vessel style.

SECTION

Comparing Angamuco ceramics

PARAGRAPH

Two of the four INAA groups match the previously identified Main Group and Group 1 from elsewhere in the Lake Pátzcuaro Basin (see Fig. 5).

The largest compositional Group A matches the Main Group, found consistently from the Classic through the Late Postclassic periods.

Similarly, Angamuco's Group C matches the previously studied Group 1.

Although that study proposed Main Group and Group 1 as products from regions to the west of the lake, we believe that Groups A and C, as well as the rest of the Angamuco assemblage, is primarily local in origin for several important reasons.

First, it is possible but unlikely that such a significant portion of the Angamuco ceramics resulted from a sustained tradition of intra-basin trade for over 1000 years.

Trade between the western side of the lake basin and Angamuco would have required ground and water transportation.

While possible, the large urban population at Angamuco was more likely to have produced their own pottery widespread consumption.

Secondly, we have demonstrated that there is no discernible difference in raw clays between the Angamuco vicinity and the lake basin.

Nonetheless, a third compositional group (Group D) does bear some similarity to at least one third of the clay samples collected from near the site.

As noted above, at least 50% of potters exploit resources within 2 km of their workshops.

This local production would have been wholly possible, given the ample clay, water, and fuel for the production of ceramics at or adjacent to Angamuco.

The similarities between the basin wide samples and the Angamuco clay samples likely reflect the overall chemical homogeneity of the Pátzcuaro Basin (Fisher, 2000, pp. 51–53).

In addition to the spatial analysis of the clay trends that are discussed above, this is supported by previous petrographic analysis of a small subsample from Angamuco (Cohen et al., 2018).

In this study, the researchers compared a small subset of Angamuco pottery to local clays to conclude local origin of the samples.

The results indicated the likely utilization of a variety of local smaller clay deposits near Angamuco, resulting in variation in local recipes.

Finally, the Criterion of Abundance (Bishop et al., 1982) dictates that the Angamuco assemblage as well as the previously reported assemblage by Hirshman and Ferguson (2012) are both more likely locally produced due to their ubiquity in both regions.

While we cannot discount the possibility that potters in both regions were utilizing common raw material resource areas, intra-basin exchange of raw materials is not supported for Angamuco pottery with currently available data.

SECTION

Conclusions

PARAGRAPH

The examination of local political economies provides an important window into the impacts of political change on existing subject populations.

Although the Late Postclassic Purépecha Empire may have controlled resources such as metal and obsidian, and they may have exerted influence over sociocultural behaviors such as religion and funerary practices (e.g. Maldonado, 2008; Pollard, 1993, 2008), control over ceramic manufacturing may have been more complicated.

Based on the four compositional groups identified in our ceramic sample, pottery production at Angamuco was not substantially reorganized during the Late Postclassic period.

Further, it appears raw materials were locally available and acquired throughout at least the Postclassic period; i.e. before and throughout empire formation.

The results of the Angamuco ceramic sample support (Hirshman's (2003), Hirshman, 2008; Hirshman et al., 2010) previous conclusions that there was no substantial reorganization of pottery production during Purépecha imperial development.

PARAGRAPH

Importantly, a lack of exchange based on ceramic archaeometric data does not preclude the exchange of ideas or iconography throughout the Lake Pátzcuaro Basin imperial heartland.

Certain imperial style vessels, designs, and the sociocultural functions of the vessels during ritual activities were likely influenced by imperial behaviors.

It is also possible, as noted by Pollard (2016), that some imperial vessels were produced at the capital of Tzintzuntzan and then exported to elites at newly conquered sites.

This remains to be tested.

Ultimately, the results of this study highlight a need to critically evaluate imperial cultural policies and the significance of local manufacturing in the Purépecha Empire.