10.1016/j.jasrep.2018.08.021

FULLTEXT

TITLE

The Franklin expedition: What sequential analysis of hair reveals about lead exposure prior to death

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

In 1845, British explorer Sir John Franklin departed on a voyage to find the North-West Passage, a sea route that links the Atlantic Ocean to the Pacific.

The expedition was to complete its mission within three years and return home, but the two ships, HMS Erebus and HMS Terror, and the 129 men aboard vanished in the Arctic.

The last Europeans to see them alive were the crews of two whaling ships on Baffin Bay in July 1845, just before they entered the Arctic Archipelago (Beattie and Geiger, 2014).

Several rescue expeditions were unsuccessful in locating Franklin and his men, and in 1859, a note from the expedition was discovered on King William Island.

It was dated May 1847 and indicated that all was well, but an addendum, written in April 1848, stated that 24 members, including Sir John Franklin, had died by that date and the remaining 105 left their icebound ships and aimed to reach safety via the Back River on the Canadian mainland.

PARAGRAPH

Researchers have debated the reasons why the Franklin expedition ended in tragedy, including the possibility of lead (Pb) poisoning from the pipes on the ships and/or the sealed tins that provided the main source of food (e.g., Battersby, 2008; Kowal et al., 1989).

Studies show that lead concentrations in the bones of three expedition members who died in the first winter at Beechey Island in the Canadian High Arctic were high relative to the present day (Beattie, 1985; Kowal et al., 1989), and this has resulted in theories that lead toxicity contributed to the demise of the expedition.

It is hypothesized that ingestion of lead from contaminated canned provisions caused acute, exogenous poisoning that weakened the men and impaired their cognitive function (Kowal et al., 1989; Beattie and Geiger, 2014).

One difficulty with this theory is that bone remodels approximately every 10–50 years (Raisz, 1999), so lead concentrations in the bones would be heavily influenced by the lead burden acquired prior to boarding the ships bound for the Arctic.

PARAGRAPH

Hair is not remodeled after formation; therefore, its composition reflects diet and physiological stress at the time of tissue formation (Williams et al., 2011; D'Ortenzio et al., 2015).

Hair grows between 0.35 and 0.44 mm per day and based on the growth rate of 0.35 mm/day, 1 cm of hair corresponds to approximately one month of elapsed time (Saitoh et al., 1967; Williams et al., 2011).

Because hair grows incrementally, and once formed is an inert tissue, its elemental composition provides a short-term record of lead exposure for the weeks/months/years (depending on the length of hair) preceding death (Appenzeller et al., 2007).

As there is an approximate 20-day delay between concentrations of lead in the first cm of hair and the corresponding monthly blood level (Rabinowitz et al., 1976; Clarkson and Magos, 2006), inferences about lead toxicity based on elemental evidence are necessarily general, but human hair can provide an important supplement to, or confirmation of skeletal evidence.

PARAGRAPH

To investigate this problem, we sequentially analysed lead (Pb) concentrations and isotopic ratios of lead in the hair keratin from an individual who was buried on King William Island during the Franklin expedition.

He died sometime between September 1846 and early 1848, so his hair provides a window on lead burden at a later stage in the expedition than did the soft tissue analyses of the Beechey Island individuals, who died early in 1846 (Beattie and Geiger, 1987, 2014).

We used lead concentrations in the hair to estimate concentrations in blood.

This was done to elucidate the pattern of lead concentrations in the three months prior to death, to gain insight into the lead burdens acquired during the expedition and to determine how deleterious the lead exposure may have been.

SECTION

Materials and methods

SECTION

The human remains tentatively identified as those of HDS Goodsir

PARAGRAPH

Human remains from the Franklin expedition were recovered in 1869 by Charles Francis Hall, an arctic explorer, from a grave in south-eastern King William Island.

They were shipped to Britain and interred in 1872 in a casket below a memorial to the Franklin expedition at the Old Royal Naval College Chapel, in Greenwich, London.

The remains were initially identified in the 19th century as belonging to one of HMS Erebus's lieutenants, Henry Le Vesconte, however a re-evaluation of the individual by Mays et al. (2011) has determined that this identification is unlikely to be correct.

Osteological examination, strontium and oxygen isotopic analysis, and a forensic facial reconstruction suggests that the remains were more likely those of HDS Goodsir, a 26 to 29-year-old male, born in Anstruther, Fife, eastern Scotland.

He was an Assistant Surgeon on the expedition and received his medical training in Edinburgh (Mays et al., 2011).

The remains were mainly skeletonised, although many bones bore dried remnants of soft tissue.

Osteological analysis found no evidence of scurvy or tuberculosis, but evidence of a dental infection in the left maxilla could have contributed to cause of death (Mays et al., 2011).

In addition to the skeletal elements, the interment contained remains of blankets and clothing in which the body had been interred on King William Island.

The hair analysed in this report was found adhering, via soft tissue decomposition products, to the textiles in large clumps (Mays et al., 2011).

It appears highly unlikely that the hair represents inadvertent extraneous contamination after the burial was exhumed.

On the contrary, its intimate association with the textiles in which the body was wrapped strongly suggests that it belongs to the buried individual.

SECTION

Sequential preparation of hair keratin

PARAGRAPH

A bundle of 55 hair fibers were gently removed from the textile with stainless steel tweezers and the application of drops of distilled water to avoid any damage to the hair.

All hair fibers were washed with distilled water, examined with a digital microscope, and photographed.

Every hair (n = 55) was photographed under 120× magnification using a Nikon SMZ 1000 digital microscope to identify the hair root, which is located closest to the scalp.

The hair root was used to orientate the hair fibers properly in preparation for sequential lead analysis.

The hair roots were slightly enlarged, usually with some epithelial tissue attached (Fig. 1a–b) (Williams et al., 2011; D'Ortenzio et al., 2015).

The hair strands were stored temporarily in labelled Teflon containers.

PARAGRAPH

The bundle of hair fibers was laid out on a template of laminated metric graph paper.

A glass sheet was placed over the graph template that was cleaned with methanol.

The hair samples were placed on the graph template and using tweezers, the hair was gently aligned along the graph template with the proximal (root) end facing left or on the zero line.

The fibers were pinched together at the centimeter mark, and a stainless-steel scalpel blade was carefully rolled across the hair fibers to cut the segment.

Following this procedure, the hair samples were divided into three sequential 1 cm segments which were then stored separately in labelled Teflon containers.

The 1 cm segments were ultrasonicated first with distilled water for 10 min then soaked in methanol and chloroform (2:1 v/v) to remove surface contamination (O'Connell and Hedges, 1999; Williams et al., 2011).

The methanol-chloroform solution was changed after 10 min and hair segments were rinsed again with distilled water and ultrasonicated for 10 min after the change of fresh solution.

The hair was rigorously cleaned using methanol-chloroform solution to distinguish between lead that was endogenous, namely absorbed into the blood and incorporated into the hair matrix, versus lead that was exogenous; derived from external contamination.

Using this technique during the washing step ensured that exogenous lead was removed, whereas the endogenous lead remained.

Hair segments were then air-dried for 24 h to remove any remaining water and weighed on a microbalance.

They were then transferred to pre-cleaned Teflon containers and shipped to Dallas for analysis.

The weight of the hair fibers was between 1.44 and 1.81 mg.

SECTION

Lead (Pb) analysis

PARAGRAPH

Upon receipt, an aliquot of 205Pb spike was added to the containers and the hair samples were decomposed in 1 mL of purified nitric acid (lead content < 1 ng/L).

After evaporation to dryness, the residue was dissolved in 200 μL of 0.6 M hydrobromic acid and Pb was separated on miniature anion exchange columns.

Lead isotopic ratios were measured on a Finnigan MAT 261 multicollector, thermal ionization mass spectrometer.

As 205Pb does not occur in nature, both the lead isotope ratios and the lead concentration can be obtained from the same analysis.

Long-term stability of the mass spectrometer was monitored by routinely measuring the lead standard SRM 981 to ensure reproducibility of the instrument and all ratios reported have been corrected by a factor of 0.145% per atomic mass unit.

SECTION

Blood level concentration of lead extrapolated from lead in the hair segments

PARAGRAPH

Blood lead concentrations were estimated from lead values from the hair (ppm) using Sanna et al.'s (2007) study, where the relationship between lead in hair and lead in blood was significantly and positively correlated.

The blood lead level required to produce hair lead concentrations was estimated using the ratio; blood (μg/dL): hair (ppm) which was approximately 1:0.73.

SECTION

Results

PARAGRAPH

Elemental and isotopic results, and estimated blood concentrations of lead are presented in Table 1.

Sequential analysis of the hair starting with FH3, which was the hair segment furthest from the scalp and represented lead concentrations three months prior to death, was the highest at 84.2 ppm.

Lead concentrations dropped to 73.3 ppm in the month just prior to death.

A study by Grandjean (1978) found blood-lead values observed in the hair of individuals with occupational lead exposure ranged from 58 to 63 μg/dL and are approximately of equivalent value to blood-lead values that we report.

As anticipated, the isotopic ratios for lead were consistent throughout all three segments of hair showing little variability.

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

As hair is a tissue that stores essential, nonessential, and toxic elements, the concentration of lead is incorporated into growing hair and is proportional to the level of lead in other body tissues (i.e., bone, blood).

Hair analysis can provide an indirect screening test for physiological excess lead in the body.

Clinical research indicates that hair concentrations of specific elements, particularly toxic elements such as lead, are highly correlated with pathological disorders (Kaslow, 2011).

High concentrations of heavy metal in hair indicate that an individual is contaminated by that heavy metal (Onuwa et al., 2012).

Elemental and isotopic analyses of hair provide a non-invasive investigative technique that has been used on modern individuals to calculate exposure to toxic metals in occupational and environmental health studies (e.g., Bencko, 1995; Wilhelm and Idel, 1996).

While it is recognized that the lead content in hair does not always reflect the total amount of lead burden in the body (Rodrigues et al., 2008; Barbosa et al., 2005), it has been reported that hair lead correlates with blood lead (Foo et al., 1993; Chłopicka et al., 1998).

PARAGRAPH

Isotopic ratio analysis has been utilized primarily to determine the source for lead in geological and environmental studies (Dudás et al., 2016).

Lead isotopes have a distinctive signature that aid in the sourcing of the origin of lead in the environment.

Lead isotopes have also been used in a limited number of studies for sourcing lead from human hair (e.g., Rabinowitz et al., 1976).

Kowal et al.'s (1991) report that lead isotope ratios in bone, hair and soft tissue from the remains of explorers discovered on King William Island and Beechey Island was identical to the solder from the food cans (Kowal et al., 1991), resulting in the conclusion that the tinned food supplies were the source of lead poisoning during the course of the Franklin expedition.

Our data showed that the lead isotope ratios in HDS Goodsir's hair (Table 1) were almost identical to that found in Kowal et al.'s (1991:198) study of hair values from the Beechey Island bodies (the isotope ratios were 206Pb/204Pb = 18.49; 207Pb/204Pb = 15.64; 208Pb/204Pb = 38.53).

Although samples that have similar isotope ratios may not necessarily be from the same source, our data indicates that during the time in which HDS Goodsir's hair was growing, he had been exposed to the same or similar source of lead as the King William and Beechey Island individuals, potentially from the tinned food, lead pipes used for the ships water tanks, or medicines administered (Farrer, 1993).

PARAGRAPH

Previous studies of bone have produced estimated blood lead concentrations in expedition members of 200–500 μg/dL (Keenleyside et al., 1996).

Millar et al. (2015) recalculated blood levels to 38–94 μg/dL, based on the premise that lead accumulated at the same rate before and during the expedition.

Our estimated blood lead levels (see Table 1) for the individual tentatively identified as HDS Goodsir are in line with Millar et al.'s (2015) estimates from bones of men who probably perished in the final throes of the expedition suggesting lead exposure, while high, may not have been of sufficient toxicity to cause worsening physical and mental symptoms.

PARAGRAPH

A significant portion of the lead that is ingested or inhaled is initially found in the bloodstream and as exposure to lead continues, the amount stored in the body will increase if one absorbs more lead than the body is excreting.

The greater the overall body burden, the greater the chances of substantial permanent damage.

In adults, bones and teeth contain approximately 95% of the body burden (Rabinowitz, 1991), with blood containing 40 to 70% of lead derived from bone (Manton, 1985).

Under certain conditions such as inactivity or, in the case of women, menopause, lead stored in bones and teeth can be remobilized and re-enter the bloodstream (and hair).

Therefore, prior exposure may provide an unexpected hazard, even if initial exposures are low.

Even low-level lead exposure resulting in blood lead levels ranging between 10 and 15 μg/dL can have deleterious effects such as cognitive impairment, behavioural deficits, and impaired renal function (Rastogi, 2008).

Individuals with prior exposures to lead, as expected for those living in 19th century industrial Britain may have faced an additional neurotoxic hazard due to lead remobilization long after exposure had ended (Morrow et al., 2007).

Remobilization of lead from bone, added to acute lead ingestion, could have had adverse health effects for some members of the Franklin expedition.

Conversely, studies on rats have shown that the body can adapt to repeated significant exposure to lead without severe negative health consequences (e.g., Lee et al., 2006).

Once blood lead levels rise above 40 μg/dL, the risk of disease increases (OSHA, 2017).

HDS Goodsir may have exhibited symptoms associated with levels of lead above 40 μg/dL indicating an increased risk of serious morbidity.

PARAGRAPH

Blood plasma is the central pool with which all other tissues in the body are exchanging, and blood levels measure cumulative lead exposure or overall body burden (National Research Council, 1993).

However, blood levels merely show immediate absorption of lead, not the effect that lead is having on the body or the effects that past lead exposure may have already caused.

There is wide variability in individual response to lead, thus it is difficult to say that a particular blood level in a given person will cause a specific effect.

For example, fatal encephalopathy has occurred in individuals with blood levels as low as 120–150 μg/dL, while very mild symptoms of lead exposure have been found in some individuals with blood levels as high as 80 μg/dL (Milković-Kraus et al., 1997).

PARAGRAPH

Suggestions that lead poisoning played a significant role in the Franklin expedition disaster have been disputed.

For example, Martin et al. (2013) analysed lead concentration and isotope distribution in bone samples from the remains found on Beechey and King William Islands.

The authors found high lead burdens in the bone but concluded that the distribution and concentrations of lead indicated long-term exposure prior to the expedition (Martin et al., 2013).

Bone samples from the graves on Beechey Island revealed levels of lead concentrations that ranged from 110 to 151 ppm (Kowal et al., 1989).

It is suggested that the men may have embarked on the expedition with greater lead burdens than those of today's levels (Millar et al., 2015).

The lead burdens likely originated from contamination in the atmosphere, water, food sources, tableware, drinking vessels, and medicine ubiquitous in 19th century Britain (Farrer, 1993; Millar et al., 2015).

It is proposed that the expedition members' high lead burdens may have been normal for that time period (Millar et al., 2015).

For example, Giffin et al. (2017) have shown levels of lead in bone to be relatively high and variable in their sample of British Royal Navy crewmembers that sailed to Antigua, West Indies (1793–1822).

Their lead levels ranged from 10.08 to 251.49 ppm, this is important as it supports the notion that the lead levels found in Franklin's men may not have been unusual for Royal Navy personnel.

PARAGRAPH

Autopsies conducted on three crewmembers who died at Beechey Island suggested that one died of pneumonia, another of tuberculosis (Amy et al., 1986; Notman et al., 1987), although this is not certain.

Recent research conducted on one of the burials from Beechey Island (John Hartnell) found low levels of zinc in the thumbnail.

The authors have questioned the lead poisoning theory and introduced a new hypothesis suggesting that zinc deficiency contributed to the loss of the expedition (Christensen et al., 2016).

If Hartnell had pulmonary tuberculosis, he likely would have been treated onboard by the ship's surgeon with zinc sulphate, and the increase in levels of zinc and copper in Hartnell's final weeks may reflect this (Millar and Bowman, 2017).

PARAGRAPH

As well as exploration and cartography, part of the purpose of the Franklin expedition was to conduct scientific research on magnetism, geology, botany, and zoology (Cyriax, 1939: 43, 45–47).

Overland sledging expeditions would have helped accomplish these aims and may also have been used for hunting game to supplement food supplies.

Artifacts recovered from Cape Felix (northern King William Island) during searches mounted to uncover the fate of Franklin indicate that such activities did indeed take place, and that sledging parties may have spent some time away from the ships (Cyriax, 1939: 132; Woodman, 1991: 90).

In his role as expedition naturalist (Fitzjames, 1845; Franklin, 1845), HDS Goodsir would have been an obvious choice for such excursions.

Although the grave from which the remains identified as Goodsir's lay on the path of the final march of Franklin's doomed men, the grave was carefully dug, whereas it is clear that those who died on the final march were not buried but simply abandoned where they fell (Beattie, 1985; Keenleyside et al., 1997).

This suggests that he died prior to the march that followed the desertion of the ships, most probably during a sledging party.

The excursion may have been extended, given the location of his grave site on the opposite side of the island from where the ships were beset, approximately 200 km away by coastal travel.

HDS Goodsir's cause of death is unclear, but if illness rather than accident, he would have been cut off from ship's medical supplies when he became ill and would have been dependent on medicines the sledging party may have taken with them.

Some of these would have contained lead (Millar et al., 2016).

There is a slight decline in lead levels found in his hair (from 84.2 ppm to 73.3 ppm), this could have been due to biological variation or his exposure to lead may have been somewhat less on the sledging excursion than aboard ship (where additional sources – e.g., from lead pipework (Battersby, 2008) – would likely have been present).

PARAGRAPH

Kowal et al. (1989) analysed hair keratin from the three Beechey Island burials and found a very wide range of lead concentrations (from 158 to 707 ppm).

Our data showed lower levels of lead (73.3–84.4 ppm).

This may be due to the rigorous cleaning procedure employed in our study or variability in the different analytical instrumentation used (atomic absorption spectrophotometer vs mass spectrometry).

Kowal et al. (1989) published the 1 cm sample from the root (closest to the scalp) for each individual; unfortunately, the lead content for the other 1 cm segments of hair were not published as they would have provided a specific time-line of variability in the lead content over the eight-month period (Millar et al., 2015).

PARAGRAPH

Lead accumulation in the bones of Franklin's men reflects exposure at least 10 years prior to the expedition, representing exposure acquired from living in industrial Britain.

Our hair lead data for HDS Goodsir reflect more immediate exposure acquired during a sledging excursion and probably onboard ship and indicate that the lead burden was high by today's standards, where blood levels ≥5 μg/dL require investigation (OSHA, 2017).

SECTION

Conclusion

PARAGRAPH

The debate as to whether lead toxicity contributed significantly to the Franklin expedition disaster is ongoing, therefore it is important to conduct analysis on tissues, such as hair, that were formed during the expedition.

Concentrations of lead in bone may have been accrued by members of the expedition over their lifetime prior to setting sail.

While acknowledging that our conclusions are based on the hair fibers of one Franklin member, estimated lead blood concentrations do not appear unduly elevated for that time period.

Although lead ingestion may have contributed to morbidity and mortality between April 1847 and May 1848, it is likely that multiple factors were responsible for the loss of the expedition.

Lead burdens may have exacerbated the physical decline of the men in the final months of the expedition but by then, the fatal end was inevitable.

Ultimately, harsh climate, exposure, infections, starvation, and lead exposure likely contributed to disastrous results of the Franklin expedition.