10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.016

ABSTRACT

TITLE

Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex and lactate dehydrogenase are targets for therapy of acute liver failure

PARAGRAPH

Acute liver failure is a rapidly progressive deterioration of hepatic function resulting in high mortality and morbidity.

Metabolic enzymes can translocate to the nucleus to regulate histone acetylation and gene expression.

PARAGRAPH

Levels and activities of pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDHC) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) were evaluated in nuclear fractions of livers of mice exposed to various hepatotoxins including CD95-antibody, α-amanitin, and acetaminophen.

Whole-genome gene expression profiling by RNA-seq was performed in livers of mice with acute liver failure and analyzed by gene ontology enrichment analysis.

Cell viability was evaluated in cell lines knocked-down for PDHA1 or LDH-A and in cells incubated with the LDH inhibitor galloflavin after treatment with CD95-antibody.

We evaluated whether the histone acetyltransferase inhibitor garcinol or galloflavin could reduce liver damage in mice with acute liver failure.

PARAGRAPH

Levels and activities of PDHC and LDH were increased in nuclear fractions of livers of mice with acute liver failure.

The increase of nuclear PDHC and LDH was associated with increased concentrations of acetyl-CoA and lactate in nuclear fractions, and histone H3 hyper-acetylation.

Gene expression in livers of mice with acute liver failure suggested that increased histone H3 acetylation induces the expression of genes related to damage response.

Reduced histone acetylation by the histone acetyltransferase inhibitor garcinol decreased liver damage and improved survival in mice with acute liver failure.

Knock-down of PDHC or LDH improved viability in cells exposed to a pro-apoptotic stimulus.

Treatment with the LDH inhibitor galloflavin that was also found to inhibit PDHC, reduced hepatic necrosis, apoptosis, and expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines in mice with acute liver failure.

Mice treated with galloflavin also showed a dose-response increase in survival.

PARAGRAPH

PDHC and LDH translocate to the nucleus, leading to increased nuclear concentrations of acetyl-CoA and lactate.

This results in histone H3 hyper-acetylation and expression of damage response genes.

Inhibition of PDHC and LDH reduces liver damage and improves survival in mice with acute liver failure.

Thus, PDHC and LDH are targets for therapy of acute liver failure.

