10.1016/j.jhep.2018.01.038

ABSTRACT

TITLE

SNX10 mediates alcohol-induced liver injury and steatosis by regulating the activation of chaperone-mediated autophagy

PARAGRAPH

Alcoholic liver disease (ALD) is a major cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide.

However, the cellular defense mechanisms underlying ALD are not well understood.

Recent studies highlighted the involvement of chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA) in regulating hepatic lipid metabolism.

Sorting nexin (SNX)-10 has a regulatory function in endolysosomal trafficking and stabilisation.

Here, we investigated the roles of SNX10 in CMA activation and in the pathogenesis of alcohol-induced liver injury and steatosis.

PARAGRAPH

Snx10 knockout (Snx10 KO) mice and their wild-type (WT) littermates fed either the Lieber–DeCarli liquid alcohol diet or a control liquid diet, and primary cultured WT and Snx10 KO hepatocytes stimulated with ethanol, were used as in vivo and in vitro ALD models, respectively.

Activation of CMA, liver injury parameters, inflammatory cytokines, oxidative stress and lipid metabolism were measured.

PARAGRAPH

Compared with WT littermates, Snx10 KO mice exhibited a significant amelioration in ethanol-induced liver injury and hepatic steatosis.

Both in vivo and in vitro studies showed that SNX10 deficiency upregulated lysosome-associated membrane protein type 2A (LAMP-2A) expression and CMA activation, which could be reversed by SNX10 overexpression in vitro.

LAMP-2A interference confirmed that the upregulation of Nrf2 and AMPK signalling pathways induced by SNX10 deficiency relied on CMA activation.

Pull-down assays revealed an interaction between SNX10 and cathepsin A (CTSA), a key enzyme involved in LAMP-2A degradation.

Deficiency in SNX10 inhibited CTSA maturation and increased the stability of LAMP-2A, resulting in an increase in CMA activity.

PARAGRAPH

SNX10 controls CMA activity by mediating CTSA maturation, and, thus, has an essential role in alcohol-induced liver injury and steatosis.

Our results provide evidence for SNX10 as a potential promising therapeutic target for preventing or ameliorating liver injury in ALD.

