10.1016/j.jasrep.2018.08.027

FULLTEXT

TITLE

The provenance of Kul Tepe obsidian artifacts: Syunik and the highlands of Armenia as possible seasonal pastureland

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

The site of Kul Tepe (E 45° 39′ 43″ - N 38° 50′ 19″, 967 m asl), as shown in Fig. 1, is located near the city of Jolfa (Hadishahr).

It is a multi-period Tepe and covers an area of c. 6 ha with a preserved height up to c. 19 m.

It is one of the larger prehistoric sites of the region, lying in a strategic position in the middle Araxes valley.

It is located next to a broad valley at the crossroads of major routes linking the Iranian plateau to Anatolia, the Southern Caucasus and northern Mesopotamia.

Based on cultural materials recovered during the first and second excavation seasons and according to radiocarbon dating, the following cultural phases at Kul Tepe are present: the Late Neolithic/Early Chalcolithic (Dalma), Late Chalcolithic (Pisdeli = LC1; LC 2 and 3 = Chaff-faced Ware), Proto-Kura-Araxes and Kura-Araxes I, Early, Middle, Late Bronze Age, Iron III, Urartian and Achaemenid periods (Abedi et al., 2014) (Table 1).

PARAGRAPH

Almost all the lithic industry of Kul Tepe utilized obsidian, although there are a few rare flint and chert pieces.

Obsidian was brought to Kul Tepe in the form of nodules and pebbles for processing locally, as suggested by numerous waste and core fragments, indicating various steps of the chaîne opératoire.

Many different types of tools are present, including flakes, blades, scrapers, borers and points.

Twenty sickle blades, displaying gloss on one edge, are present.

Utilized flakes and blades as well side-scrapers and sickle blades appear in high frequency as mentioned in Table 2.

PARAGRAPH

During the second season, 2120 lithic artifacts were recovered from Trench I (557 specimens) and Trench IV (1563 specimens).

Out of these samples, 2013 artifacts were obsidian and 107 artifacts were chert/flint.

A total of 1493 of the obsidian specimens were from the Early–Late Chalcolithic period, and 520 specimens belong to the Early Bronze Age (Table 2).

In total, 32 obsidian samples were selected from Chalcolithic and Bronze Age layers of Kul Tepe for chemical analyses by portable ED-XRF in the Archaeometry Department of Tabriz Islamic Art University.

The results suggest three main sources: Syunik, Geghasar and Meydan Dağ.

The chemical results will be discussed along with archaeological implications.

The analysis and results of the first season are published already (Khademi Nadooshan et al., 2013) and will be discussed for a final conclusion also.

SECTION

Background of archaeological research and obsidian studies in the region

SECTION

Archaeological research

PARAGRAPH

The site was originally discovered by an expedition to the East Azerbaijan province in 1968 under the supervision of Kambakhsh Fard (1968) and later reported by Kleiss and Kroll (1992), Kroll (1984), Edwards (1986), and Omrani (1994).

Kul Tepe is located precisely in the northwestern corner of Iran which is a gateway between the Southern Caucasus and northwestern Iran.

The first excavation season at Kul Tepe was carried out in June–August 2010 (70 days of fieldwork) (Abedi et al., 2014).

Because of the huge amount of material, Kul Tepe needed more excavation for a better understanding of the cultural relations and evolution of the region.

The second season was conducted during August–October 2013 to investigate further archaeological questions and extending the studied area.

SECTION

Obsidian studies

PARAGRAPH

Obsidian artifacts were frequently used in prehistory and are found widely in archaeological sites around the world.

Provenance studies of obsidian have been an issue of intense research and debate between archaeometry and geology.

Different provenance studies were carried out in Anatolia and the Caucasus since the 1960s, but obsidian research in Iran is still at a very early stage.

Recent research on obsidian sources in Iran accompanied by prehistoric obsidian provenance studies gave the opportunity to establish a database, and to outline a horizon and perspective for future obsidian studies in Iran (Abedi et al., 2018a,b).

PARAGRAPH

In the mid-1960s, Renfrew et al. (1966, 1968) used geochemical methods to study obsidian from the Near East.

Renfrew's research on obsidian sources in Anatolia and the Near East focused on sources located in central and eastern Turkey and Armenia.

Later Blackman (1984) and other researchers demonstrated that long distance trade existed between ancient sites in Iran and the obsidian sources in Anatolia and the Caucasus (Renfrew et al., 1966, 1968; Renfrew and Dixon, 1976; Dixon et al., 1968; Wright, 1969; Dixon, 1976; Bigazzi et al., 1998; Chataigner et al., 1998; Poidevin, 1998; Frahm, 2010).

More recently, additional sourcing and provenance studies have been carried out by Iranian scholars (Agha-Aligol et al., 2015; Khademi Nadooshan et al., 2007, 2010; Ghorabi et al., 2008; Niknami et al., 2010; Khademi Nadooshan et al., 2013; Abedi, 2015).

Some of the publications (Ghorabi et al., 2010; Niknami et al., 2010) suggest that obsidian tools might came from an unknown source located in Iran (perhaps Sahand or Sabalan Mountains).

However, the results provided by these studies were inconclusive.

Characterizations displayed were sometimes clear overlaps with Armenian sources or provided values for SiO2 that are never found in obsidian (Agha-Aligol et al., 2015; Ghorabi et al., 2010; Khademi Nadooshan et al., 2007).

This paper will discuss the new analysis of 32 obsidian samples (Fig. 2) from Chalcolithic and Early Bronze Age layers from Kul Tepe in NW Iran.

SECTION

Analytical method

PARAGRAPH

For the measurements a portable ED-XRF device (Thermo Scientific Niton XL3t 950-HE GOLDD+ Serial nr.

89086 from the Eurasia Department of the German Archaeological Institute, Berlin) was used, equipped with an Ag anode at max.

50 kV, silicon drift detector.

Technical parameters: TestAllGeo-mode with filter settings 90/90/60/125 s, total measuring time 360 s, aperture 8 mm.

This setting gives best results for ceramics, stones, slags and other material with high silica content and acceptable results for light elements also.

Sodium cannot be detected with this device, but most elements from magnesium onwards which have higher atomic weights were possible.

Factory calibration was used and the oxides were normalized to 100 wt% (without Na2O).

To ensure reliable data, measurements of international certified standard reference material (NIST2780, NIST2709a, Till4 and others) were used during the sessions.

The standard deviation and the variability according to the standards are in a low and normal range that ensures comparability with published datasets, although minor shifts have to be respected (much less than one decimal place).

Sickle gloss has to be kept in mind and sample thickness plays an important role.

Several elements are difficult to detect in low quantities, when the samples or artifacts are too thin (as documented for the device used in this study by test measurements of the Eurasia Department; also for other difficulties using pXRF on obsidian and further references c.f.: Ferguson, 2012).

Some of the most reliable element concentrations in obsidian that can be obtained using portable ED-XRF are Rb, Sr, Y, Zr and Nb, when the concentrations are above the detection limit (Darabi and Glascock, 2013; Maziar and Glascock, 2017).

SECTION

Results

PARAGRAPH

The compositional data measured for the 32 artifacts by pXRF are listed in Table 3.

A scatter plot of the Zr versus Y concentration (Fig. 3) allows recognition of three clusters which match the composition of the well-known sources: Syunik (29 artifacts), Geghasar (5 artifact) and Meydan Dağ (3 artifacts) (Tables 3–4).

The results match very well with the first series of obsidian analyses that were made in the Archaeometry Laboratory at the University of Missouri Research Reactor (MURR) by non-destructive analysis by energy dispersive XRF (Khademi Nadooshan et al., 2013).

PARAGRAPH

The main possible difficulties in obsidian provenance of the region are related to some of the neighboring subsources in Armenia which are found to be chemically very similar and are difficult to be distinguished using portable ED-XRF due to the low concentration of some elements compared to the device's limit of detection.

To be mentioned are the Syunik sources in the southernmost part of Armenia (Cherry et al., 2010), where the sub-sources of Bazenk, Sevkar, Metz Sevkar, Satanakar, Metz Satanakar, and Pokr Satanakar occur.

Geghasar and Spitaksar obsidian comes from the Gegham massif immediately east of Yerevan while the outcrops of Arteni (Metz Arteni and Pokr Arteni as a single Arteni) are located further west on the slopes of the Aragats massif (cf. Fig. 1).

PARAGRAPH

According to our analysis, the main source used at Kul Tepe during the Chalcolithic and Early Bronze Age was Syunik (75%).

The Geghasar (15.6%) and Meydan Dağ (9.4%) sources were used in lesser amounts.

Syunik is the closest source to Kul Tepe, not more than 75 km far from the site (as the crow flies).

Syunik material was used in all prehistoric periods at Kul Tepe.

Geghasar obsidian was used only in the Early Chalcolithic (Dalma) (2 samples), Kura-Araxes I (2 samples) and Kura-Araxes II (1 sample) periods.

Meydan Dağ obsidian was used only in the Early Chalcolithic (Dalma) (2 samples) and Late Chalcolithic 3 (Chaff-Face Ware) (1 sample) periods (Table 4).

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

According to the first season of obsidian analyses at Kul Tepe, eight different sources were identified: 41 samples from Syunik, Meydan Dağ (4 samples), Nemrut Dağ (2 samples), Gegham (2 samples), Bazenk (1 sample), Choraphor (1 sample), Gutansar (1 sample), and unassigned (1 artifact) (Khademi Nadooshan et al., 2013).

Regarding both series of obsidian analysis and seen across all periods, the Syunik sources are the most represented (76.5%), followed by Geghasar and Meydan (8.2%) and Nemrut Dağ (Table 3; Figs. 4–5).

This polysource model, dominated by one major and supplemented by a few other sources in smaller proportions, is a pattern identified elsewhere in the region, such as at the Neolithic sites of Aknashen and Aratashen and the adjacent site of Dava Göz.

This phenomenon can be connected to the mobility of groups in an obsidian-rich environment (Abedi et al., 2018a; Abedi, 2017; Chataigner and Gratuze, 2014a, 2014b; Badalyan et al., 2004).

PARAGRAPH

According to Table 4, during the Early Chalcolithic Dalma period, two main obsidian supply zones are identified: Syunik-Gegham and Meydan, whereas Syunik predominates.

From LC1, a refocus on Syunik is attested.

This could be explained, as indicated in the first season results, by a development of transhumans toward the Vorotan Valley.

Such a development is suggested by the Kul Tepe excavations, where obsidian is imported in the form of pebbles, similar to those found in the Vorotan River at Godedzor (Khademi Nadooshan et al., 2013, Fig. 4).

PARAGRAPH

The obsidian from Syunik (Sevkar) had a very limited diffusion toward the northern Near East; it is not known outside of the Lake Urmia Basin.

As the obsidian artifacts from Kul Tepe show, in this region, the quantity of Syunik obsidian appears to decrease rapidly over time.

According to chemical analyses from the Hajji Firuz phase onward, the obsidian from the Lake Van region is also present: Meydan Dağ and Nemrut Dağ (Renfrew and Dixon, 1976).

At Kul Tepe, Meydan Dağ and Nemrut Dağ groups are not predominant in later phases until the Iron III Period.

The most frequently used source is Syunik (Khademi Nadooshan et al., 2013).

PARAGRAPH

Kul Tepe is located next to the broad Araxes valley, at the core of the highlands and the crossroads of major routes linking the Iranian plateau to Anatolia and the Caucasus with northern Mesopotamia.

This strategic location is further enhanced by the wealth of natural resources in the Jolfa region, which is rich in copper and salt deposits.

Kul Tepe is more than 30 h by foot from the nearest source of obsidian (Barge and Chataigner, 2003; Chataigner and Barge, 2008; Chataigner et al., 2010).

However, the material is abundantly represented on the site and its sources are diverse: Syunik, Gegham, Gutansar, Bazenk and sources in eastern Turkey.

This polysource model, dominated by one major origin and complemented by other sources in smaller proportions can be explained by the location of Kul Tepe along an important route on the southern bank of the Araxes, leading from eastern Turkey (region of Erzurum) to the northwest of Iran (basin of Lake Urmia).

Studies show that the diffusion of Syunik (Sevkar) obsidian beyond Transcaucasia is limited to Lake Urmia Basin only (Chataigner et al., 2010).

However the consistent diffusion of Syunik obsidian suggests that the populations established in the basin of Lake Urmia had special links with those in the Vorotan Valley (Fig. 4).

An interpretation of the Kul Tepe artifacts suggest by a model of Chataigner et al. (2010) is completely confirmed by the recent Kul Tepe obsidian analysis for the Chalcolithic period.

It is also applicable for the Early Bronze Age at Kul Tepe and most of Lake Urmia Basin sites, although other sources at the end of the Bronze Age and Iron III Periods have been used additionally.

PARAGRAPH

According to the interpretation of two seasons of excavations and obsidian studies, the inhabitants of Kul Tepe, at least in the Chalcolithic and Bronze Age, were agro-pastoralists who spent most of their time at Kul Tepe engaged in farming and other household activities and moved seasonally during summer in search of pastures for their herds in the highlands.

New research at the Chalcolithic site of Godedzor indicates a seasonal summer campsite in the highlands near the Syunik (Sevkar) obsidian source.

This site shows good evidence of material known from sites in the Lake Urmia Basin, especially ceramic types.

It presents Chalcolithic signs of Dalma and Pisdeli cultures.

Excavators at Godedzor (Chataigner et al., 2010) suggest that this site was a summer seasonal campsite for inhabitants from Kul Tepe and the Lake Urmia Basin (wintering region), using the obsidian from Syunik.

They also suggest that obsidian was used only for local trade and personal use, not for extensive trade, because it did not diffuse beyond the Lake Urmia Basin.

Obsidian appears to have been a byproduct of the pastoral lifestyle for local trade between the Lake Urmia basin and the Caucasus region.

Analysis of Kul Tepe artifacts suggests that sites like Kul Tepe and Dava Göz (Abedi, 2017; Abedi et al., 2018a) had an intermediate role in transferring obsidian raw materials to NW Iran and the Lake Urmia Basin during Chalcolithic and Early Bronze Age periods.

Only after the Early Bronze Age do we find extensive trade and exchange with eastern Anatolia around Lake Van (see Khademi Nadooshan et al., 2013).

SECTION

Conclusion

PARAGRAPH

The chemical analysis of 53 obsidian artifacts from the first excavation season (Khademi Nadooshan et al., 2013) proved that the main source of obsidian for the workshops in Kul Tepe was Syunik (41 samples) but obsidian from sources as far as west as the Lake Van region Nemrut Dag (2) and Meydan Dağ (4) and as far north as Gutansar (1), Bazenk (1) and Choraphor (1) were also utilized.

Only one specimen had an unassigned source.

In addition, according to the study of obsidian artifacts from the second season, analyzed by pXRF, it can be suggested, that from 32 samples, 25 specimens belong to the Syunik source, five samples to Gegham (Geghasar), and only three samples come from Meydan Dağ.

The results suggest that the main source used by Kul Tepe inhabitants during the Chalcolithic and the Early Bronze Age was Syunik, although Geghasar and Meydan Dağ were used in a limited portion also.

Syunik obsidian was used during all prehistoric periods at Kul Tepe, and have been a major contribution to other Chalcolithic and Bronze Age sites in north-western Iran, such as Dava Göz, Kohne Pasgah, Kohne Tepesi, Hajji Firuz, Yanik, Pisdeli (Abedi et al., 2018a; Maziar and Glascock, 2017; Barge et al., 2018), Syunik seems to be one of the main obsidian sources of the Lake Urmia Basin and was exploited by people from intermediate sites like Kul Tepe and Dava Göz who then transferred the raw material to this region.

This is indicated by new evidence of Lake Urmia Basin typical archaeological finds from Godedzor in the Vorotan Valley, (30–50 km) that suggests the seasonal occupation of pasturelands near Syunik and the exploitation of the obsidian deposit for import to the Lake Urmia Basin via intermediate sites like Kul Tepe and Dava Göz.

SECTION

Funding

PARAGRAPH

This work was supported by the Iranian Center for Archaeological Research (ICAR) [grant numbers 892/208/488, 2010 and 922/208/262, 2013]; and ICHHTO of Eastern Azerbaijan and the Tabriz Islamic Art University.