10.1016/j.jhep.2018.08.011

ABSTRACT

TITLE

Beneficial effects of lifestyle intervention in non-obese patients with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease

PARAGRAPH

Around 10–20% of patients with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) are non-obese.

The benefit of weight reduction in such patients is unclear.

We aim to study the efficacy of lifestyle intervention in non-obese patients with NAFLD and to identify factors that predict treatment response.

PARAGRAPH

A total of 154 community NAFLD patients were randomised to a 12-month lifestyle intervention programme involving regular exercise, or to standard care.

The primary outcome was remission of NAFLD at Month 12 by proton-magnetic resonance spectroscopy.

After the programme, the patients were prospectively followed until Year 6.

The Asian body mass index (BMI) cut-off of 25 kg/m2 was used to define non-obese NAFLD.

PARAGRAPH

Patients were assigned to the intervention (n = 77) and control (n = 77) groups (39 and 38 in each group had baseline BMI <25 and ≥25 kg/m2, respectively).

More patients in the intervention group achieved the primary outcome than the control group regardless of baseline BMI (non-obese: 67% vs. 18%, p <0.001; obese: 61% vs. 21%, p <0.001).

Lifestyle intervention, lower baseline intrahepatic triglyceride, and reduction in body weight and waist circumference were independent factors associated with remission of NAFLD in non-obese patients.

Half of non-obese patients achieved remission of NAFLD with 3–5% weight reduction; the same could only be achieved in obese patients with 7–10% weight reduction.

By Year 6, non-obese patients in the intervention group remained more likely to maintain weight reduction and alanine aminotransferase normalisation than the control group.

PARAGRAPH

Lifestyle intervention is effective in treating NAFLD in both non-obese and obese patients.

Weight reduction predicts remission of NAFLD in non-obese patients, but a modest weight reduction may be sufficient in this population.

