10.1016/j.jhep.2019.10.006

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Impact of obeticholic acid on the lipoprotein profile in patients with non-alcoholic steatohepatitis

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is the most common etiology of chronic liver disease, affecting nearly a third of the United States population.1

Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) is the clinically aggressive variant of NAFLD that is characterized histologically by hepatic steatosis along with necro-inflammatory activity.1

In the absence of approved pharmacological therapy, NASH is increasingly being targeted for drug development efforts.3

Obeticholic acid (OCA) is a farnesoid X receptor (FXR) agonist that was recently shown to improve liver histology in patients with NASH in a randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial.4

FXR is a bile acid-binding transcription factor belonging to the super family of nuclear receptors.

Because of its central role in inflammation, glucose and lipid metabolism, FXR agonism is an attractive therapeutic target in NASH.

PARAGRAPH

Mechanistically, FXR activation reduces triglyceride-rich lipoproteins via repression of hepatic sterol regulatory element binding protein 1c (SREBP1c), microsomal triglyceride transfer protein (MTTP), and apolipoprotein B (apoB) gene expression.5–7

However, it also reduces cholesterol conversion to bile acids, which is a major mechanism of cholesterol disposal.

FXR agonism via OCA in the Farnesoid X Receptor Ligand Obeticholic Acid in NASH Treatment (FLINT) trial led to an increase in low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) and reduction in high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C).4,8

Since cardiovascular disease (CVD) is common among patients with NAFLD and the leading cause of mortality among patients with NAFLD,9–11 this rise in serum LDL-C requires a deeper understanding.

PARAGRAPH

The advanced lipoprotein profile consists of measuring a number of lipoprotein particles and sub-particles with varying atherogenic risk that are often better predictors of future CVD events than the traditional lipid panel, especially in individuals with metabolic diseases such as type 2 diabetes.12–14

Recent studies have highlighted a close relationship between NAFLD and atherogenic lipoproteins, despite relatively normal traditional lipid panel-related parameters.15,16

The impact of FXR activation via OCA on atherogenic lipoprotein sub-particles is currently unknown.

In order to bridge this knowledge gap, we conducted the current study to evaluate the impact of OCA on atherogenic lipoproteins in patients enrolled in the FLINT trial.

SECTION

Patients and methods

SECTION

Study design

PARAGRAPH

The data obtained for this study were from participants of the FLINT trial, which was an adult treatment trial conducted by the Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis Clinical Research Network (NASH CRN).4

Briefly, 283 patients with biopsy proven NASH were randomized to 72 weeks of OCA 25 mg once-daily treatment versus placebo.

The primary outcome was improvement in liver histology, defined as a decrease in NAFLD activity score (NAS) of at least 2 points without a worsening of fibrosis from baseline to end-of-treatment (EOT).4

Liver biopsies in the last 64 patients were not performed after interim analysis showed that 43% of patients met the primary outcome with OCA treatment compared to 21% on placebo (p = 0.0024); while treatment was also discontinued at that time because of concerns relating to increases in circulating cholesterol levels in patients taking OCA.

SECTION

Liver histology

PARAGRAPH

All liver biopsies were evaluated centrally by the NASH CRN Pathology Committee members as a group and graded according to the NASH CRN criteria.2

Hepatic steatosis was graded on an ordinal scale from 0–3 (grade 0 = <5% steatosis; grade 1 = 5–33% steatosis; grade 2 = 34–66% steatosis; grade 3 = ≥67% steatosis).

Cytologic ballooning was graded on a scale of 0–2 (grade 0 = none; grade 1 = few ballooned hepatocytes; grade 2 = many ballooned hepatocytes).

Lobular inflammation was graded on a scale from 0–3 (grade 0 = none; grade 1 = <2 foci/20x high-powered field [hpf]; grade 2 = 2–4 foci/20× hpf; grade 3 = >4 foci/20× hpf).

Hepatic fibrosis was quantified from stages 0–4 and for the purpose of this analysis fibrosis stages 1a, 1b, and 1c were considered to be stage 1.2

Study pathologists were blinded to treatment assignment and whether biopsies were before or after treatment.

SECTION

Study visit and procedures

PARAGRAPH

All patients were evaluated at their respective medical center and protocol driven anthropometric measurements, blood tests and patient assessments were collected.

All blood was collected after an overnight fast.

Fasting traditional lipid profile consisted of serum total cholesterol, HDL-C, LDL-C and triglycerides.

There were no pre-specified rules regarding the treatment of dyslipidemia during the clinical trial and the decision to initiate and escalate lipid lowering therapy was left at the discretion of the treating physician.

SECTION

Lipoprotein profile

PARAGRAPH

A comprehensive lipoprotein profile analysis was performed on stored EDTA plasma samples collected at 0 weeks, 12 weeks, 72 weeks, and 96 weeks.

Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR) spectra were collected on a Vantera Clinical Analyzer from EDTA plasma samples as previously described.17,18

Concentrations for the lipoprotein classes (very low-density lipoprotein [VLDL], LDL, and HDL particle numbers) and subclasses (small, medium and large) were calculated using the LP3 deconvolution algorithm (LabCorp, Morrisville, NC).

The LP3 algorithm reports lipoprotein particles of the following diameter ranges: large VLDL (>60 nm), medium VLDL (42–60 nm), small VLDL (29–42 nm), intermediate density lipoprotein (IDL) (23–29 nm), large LDL (20.5–23 nm), small LDL (18–20.5 nm), large HDL (9.4–14 nm) medium HDL (8.2–9.4 nm) and small HDL (7.3–8.2 nm).18,19

The calculated mean VLDL, LDL, and HDL particle sizes were weighted averages derived from the sum of the diameter of each subclass multiplied by its relative mass percentage.17

SECTION

Statistical analysis

PARAGRAPH

The current analysis includes the subset of FLINT patients who had both a baseline and EOT liver biopsy.

Summary statistics include means, standard deviations and percentages.

To evaluate the impact of OCA therapy on lipoproteins, the standard lipid profiles and NMR lipoprotein profiles were evaluated at baseline, 12 weeks, and 72 weeks (EOT) on therapy and 24 weeks off-treatment (96 weeks).

Treatment group differences at baseline were compared using ANOVA, while group differences at follow-up were compared using analysis of covariance (ANCOVA), adjusting for baseline value.

Sensitivity analysis included the testing of the OCA treatment effect by statin use (i.e., effect modification) at each time point.

The FLINT trial was not designed to evaluate the impact of statin therapy on lipoproteins and as such the methodology did not standardize an approach to lipid management, resulting in initiation and titration of statins at the discretion of the treating physician.

As such, in the present study we present empiric data regarding statin use.

Framingham risk score (FRS), a validated cardiovascular risk score, was used to evaluate the impact of OCA on future CVD risk.20

p values are nominal and have not been adjusted for multiple comparisons, multiple looks or multiple outcomes.

Analyses were conducted using SAS (Version 9.3 of the SAS System for Windows, Cary, NC: SAS Institute Inc., 2002–2004) and Stata (StataCorp.

2015.

Stata Statistical Software: Release 14.

College Station, TX: StataCorp LP).

SECTION

Results

SECTION

Patient characteristics

PARAGRAPH

A total of 196 patients (99 receiving OCA and 97 receiving placebo) who had liver biopsies and lipid profiles performed at baseline and EOT were included in the current analysis.

Baseline demographic characteristics of the 2 groups were similar (Table 1).

Overall mean (SD) age was 51 (12) years and the majority of the patients were female (67%) and white (82%).

The serum aminotransferase levels and distribution of liver histological features, including steatosis, lobular inflammation, and cytological ballooning, were similar between the placebo and OCA-treated groups.

At baseline, the distribution of diabetes, hypertension and dyslipidemia were similar across the 2 groups.

Finally, 52% of the OCA-treated group was on statin therapy at baseline compared to 44% of the placebo group (p = 0.32).

The FRS categories were similar and OCA therapy did impact the FRS at EOT (week 72) and follow-up (week 96) (Table S1).

SECTION

Lipids

PARAGRAPH

The baseline lipid panel consisting of LDL-C, HDL-C, total cholesterol and triglyceride results were similar between the 2 groups (Table 1).

After 12 weeks of therapy, the baseline-adjusted mean difference between OCA-treated and placebo groups was 167 mg/dl vs. 173 mg/dl (p = 0.53) for triglycerides, 206 mg/dl vs. 182 mg/dl (p <0.0001) for total cholesterol, 39.3 mg/dl vs. 43.3 mg/dl (p <0.0001) for HDL-C and 135 mg/dl vs. 107 mg/dl (p <0.0001) for LDL-C.

The treatment group differences in serum triglycerides were not statistically different at week 72 and 96.

At 72 weeks, the OCA group had higher total serum cholesterol (196 vs. 181 mg/dl; p = 0.0009) and LDL-C (120 vs. 103 mg/dl; p <0.0001), but the total cholesterol and LDL-C were decreased after OCA discontinuation and were similar to placebo at 96 weeks.

Compared to placebo, serum HDL-C levels were lower at 72 weeks in the OCA group (42.5 vs. 44.7 mg/dl; p = 0.01) but were similar after treatment discontinuation (96 weeks follow-up).

SECTION

Very low-density lipoprotein sub-particles

PARAGRAPH

The distribution of total, large, medium and small VLDL particles was similar between OCA-treated and placebo groups at baseline (Table 2 and Fig. 1).

No difference in baseline-adjusted mean total VLDL particle concentration was noted at 12, 72 and 96 weeks between the OCA-treated and placebo groups.

The baseline-adjusted mean large VLDL concentration was lower in the OCA-treated group than the placebo group at 12 weeks (6.8 nmol/L vs. 8.9 nmol/L; p = 0.002).

The reduction in large VLDL particle concentration at 12 weeks in the OCA-treated group was accompanied by an increase in small VLDL particle concentration (33.9 vs. 28.0 nmol/L; p = 0.02).

However, the differences in large and small VLDL particle concentrations were no longer significant at 72 or 96 weeks.

The medium VLDL particle concentration was not statistically different between OCA-treated and placebo groups at 12, 72 or 96 weeks.

SECTION

Low-density lipoprotein sub-particles

PARAGRAPH

The total LDL particle, IDL, large LDL, and small LDL particle concentrations were similar across the 2 groups at baseline.

At 12 and 72 weeks, the baseline-adjusted mean LDL particle concentrations in the OCA-treated group were elevated (1,667 nmol/L and 1,511 nmol/L, respectively) compared to the placebo group (1,329 nmol/L; p <0.0001 and 1,331 nmol/L; p = 0.001, respectively).

The increase in LDL particles was mirrored by a similar increase in large-buoyant LDL and small-dense LDL particle concentrations at 12 and 72 weeks.

The large LDL particle concentration was 475 nmol/L in the OCA-treated group and 308 nmol/L in the placebo group at 12 weeks (p <0.0001), and 391 nmol/L in the OCA group compared to 332 nmol/L in the placebo group at 72 weeks (p = 0.04).

Similarly, baseline-adjusted mean small LDL particle concentration was higher in the OCA group than the placebo group at 12 weeks (1,015 vs. 872 nmol/L; p = 0.002) and 72 weeks (959 nmol/L vs. 838 nmol/L; p = 0.01).

The total, large, and small LDL particle concentrations were similar between placebo and OCA-treated groups at 96 weeks.

Finally, IDL concentrations at 12, 72 and 96 weeks were not different in the OCA or placebo groups.

SECTION

High-density lipoprotein sub-particles

PARAGRAPH

The total HDL and HDL sub-particle (small, medium, and large) concentrations were similar between the treatment groups at baseline.

The baseline-adjusted mean total HDL concentrations of OCA-treated groups were 30.2 µmol/L at 12 weeks, 32.1 µmol/L at 72 weeks and 33.4 µmol/L compared to 35.0 µmol at 12 weeks (p <0.0001), 34.8 µmol/L at 72 weeks (p ≤0.001) and 35.3 µmol/L at 96 weeks (p = 0.01) in the placebo group.

These changes were driven by reductions in large and medium HDL sub-particles in the OCA-treated group compared to the placebo group.

OCA therapy did not affect small HDL sub-particles, which were comparable to placebo group throughout therapy and after drug discontinuation.

SECTION

Patterns of lipid lowering therapy during the study

PARAGRAPH

Statin use was similar between the treatment groups at baseline (p = 0.60) (Table 3).

In the OCA group with complete statin use data, 36% (32/90) of patients were not on statin therapy at enrollment, 12 weeks and EOT; 46% (41/90) were on statin therapy at enrollment, 12 weeks and EOT; and 18% (17/90) required intermittent statin therapy during the duration of the trial.

In the placebo group with complete statin use data, 42% (39/92) of patients were not on statin therapy at enrollment, 12 weeks and EOT; 39% (36/92) were on statin therapy at enrollment, 12 weeks and EOT; and 19% (17/92) required intermittent statin therapy during the duration of the trial.

There were no significant interactions between the treatment effect and the effect of time-dependent statin use for any lipoprotein particle at baseline, or any baseline-adjusted change at 12 weeks, 72 weeks or 96 weeks (Table S2).

When treatment groups were stratified according to statin use, patients on OCA had increased total LDL concentrations, small LDL, and a reduction in large HDL at week 12 (Table S3).

In the OCA group, 6 patients were on ezetimibe at baseline and 2 additional patients were started on ezetimibe during follow-up.

In the placebo cohort, 6 patients were on ezetimibe at baseline, 1 stopped during follow-up and ezetimibe was not initiated in any patients during the study course.

No patients took clofibrate during the course of the study.

SECTION

Cardiovascular events in OCA treatment arm

PARAGRAPH

Fourteen (14%) OCA-treated patients developed an adverse event related to CVD during the trial.

There were no significant differences between those developing or not developing CVD-related adverse events based on baseline-adjusted changes in any lipoprotein particle at 12 weeks, 72 weeks or 96 weeks (Table S3).

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

The activation of FXR by OCA led to an increase in LDL-C during the FLINT trial4 and in the present study we further explored this observation by demonstrating the impact of OCA therapy on the lipoprotein subfractions.

The relationship between elevated LDL-C and CVD risk is well established.21

The relative impact on long-term outcomes of an increase in LDL-C with OCA therapy, compared to the observed histological benefit, remains undefined.

The findings from the FLINT trial have provided a major impetus for concomitant use of statin therapy22 and a priori guidelines with medications targeting the bile acid pathway for treatment of NAFLD.

PARAGRAPH

The findings of the current study must be evaluated in the context of published literature that have demonstrated the relationship between atherogenic dyslipidemia and NASH.15,16

NASH is associated with upregulation of hepatic synthesis of triglycerides and cholesterol, which are transported out of the liver in large VLDL particles.16

These large triacylglycerol-rich VLDL particles, which are slowly metabolized in the periphery, are subject to a cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP)-mediated exchange process that removes cholesteryl ester from the particle core and replaces it with triacylglycerol.23

LDL, so altered, is a potential substrate for hepatic lipase which can then result in the generation of smaller, more atherogenic lipoproteins often called small-dense LDL.24,25

In contrast, metabolism of cholesteryl ester enriched small VLDL particles results in the formation of large-buoyant LDL particles, which are thought to be less atherogenic.26

In the present study, OCA treatment resulted in a reduction in large VLDL particles and an increase in small VLDL particles, while total VLDL lipoprotein particle concentration was not affected by OCA therapy.

These findings are consistent with published literature showing FXR reduces triglyceride-rich VLDL lipoproteins by repressing hepatic SREBP1c, MTTP and apoB expression.5–7,27

Thus, the net effect of FXR agonism is a shift towards small VLDL particles, which are a reflection of a less atherogenic lipoprotein profile.

PARAGRAPH

The VLDL particle is hydrolyzed by lipoprotein lipase and slow metabolism is a key prerequisite for formation of atherogenic small-dense LDL particles.26

FXR activation amplifies the effects of lipoprotein lipase by increasing expression of apoCII, an activator of lipoprotein lipase, and reducing expression of apoCIII, an inhibitor of lipoprotein lipase, thereby promoting intravascular VLDL lipolysis and generation of LDL.28,29

Furthermore, since FXR inhibits bile acid synthesis from cholesterol, it leads to increased intrahepatic cholesterol content.27

Increased intrahepatic cholesterol reduces LDL-receptor activity and concentration.

Thus, increased lipoprotein lipase activity, coupled with a reduction in the LDL-receptor, results in reduced LDL clearance and elevated concentrations of circulating LDL particles and LDL-C.30

In the present study, we observed an increase in LDL-C after 12 weeks of therapy which persisted for the duration of therapy and returned to baseline after OCA discontinuation.

Expectedly, we also observed an increase in both large-buoyant LDL and small-dense LDL particles while the patients were on OCA therapy and an improvement with OCA discontinuation.

We also note that no statistically significant changes in atherogenic IDL were observed with OCA therapy, although there was a non-significant increase in IDL particles with OCA therapy.

The exact mechanism underlying these changes is not forthcoming from the present study, but may be related to increased lipoprotein lipase activity.30

PARAGRAPH

HDL particles also play a key role in atherogenesis and CVD and are better predictors of cardiovascular risk than HDL-C.19,31,32

FXR agonism has been shown to increase HDL-C clearance by increasing CETP expression and hepatic scavenger receptor-B1 and decreasing HDL production by decreasing apolipoprotein A-I.30,33–36

In the present study, OCA treatment led to a reduction in HDL-C, along with a reduction in total, large and medium HDL particle concentrations, particularly after 12 weeks of therapy, and the effect persisted until EOT.

As with VLDL and LDL, HDL-C and HDL particle concentrations improved after OCA cessation.

PARAGRAPH

The current study provides greater granularity regarding the effect of OCA on dyslipidemia during the FLINT trial.

However, the findings should be evaluated in the context of study limitations.

The data presented show correlative relationships but do not explore the key mechanisms responsible for the dyslipidemia associated with OCA use.

In the FLINT trial, the rise in total cholesterol and LDL-C was not fully anticipated, thus a standardized lipid management plan was not part of the clinical trial design.

In addition, the dose of statin therapy was not collected.

Within this limitation, it is difficult to ascertain how statin therapy might have impacted the observed lipid changes with OCA therapy and the results presented with regards to statin use on lipoprotein profile must be interpreted with caution.

Future mechanistic studies incorporating statin therapy as clinical designs are necessary to evaluate this relationship further.

While data linking atherogenic lipoprotein sub-particles to CVD events exist in the cardiovascular literature, similar data is limited in patients with NASH and the current study provides the framework to evaluate this association further.

Well-designed prospective studies with standardized lipid lowering therapeutic regimens are essential to evaluate not only the impact of lipoproteins on cardiovascular events but also the impact of lipid lowering therapy on lipoproteins in patients with NASH.

Furthermore, ongoing clinical trials with FXR agonists and fibroblast growth factor (FGF19) analogues should provide additional data on the interactions between bile acid and lipid metabolism.

Since data on diets was not collected as part of the FLINT trial, it is difficult to ascertain how the diet might have impacted on the lipoprotein profile in the present study.

PARAGRAPH

In summary, OCA treatment was associated with an increase in LDL-C and total cholesterol, which was largely due to an increase in less atherogenic small VLDL and large-buoyant LDL particles.

Co-administration of statin therapy with FXR agonist may potentially blunt the increases in lipoprotein sub-particles associated with FXR agonism, however, this strategy requires further validation.

SECTION

Abbreviations

PARAGRAPH

ALP, alkaline phosphatase; ALT, alanine aminotransferase; AST, aspartate aminotransferase; CETP, cholesteryl ester transfer protein; EOT, end-of-treatment; FLINT, Farnesoid X Receptor Ligand Obeticholic Acid in NASH Treatment; FRS, Framingham risk score; FXR, farnesoid X receptor; GGT, gamma glutamyltransferase; HDL, high-density lipoprotein; IDL, intermediate density lipoprotein; LDL, low-density lipoprotein; MTTP, microsomal triglyceride transfer protein; NAFLD, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease; NAS, NAFLD activity score; NMR, nuclear magnetic resonance; OCA, obeticholic acid; SREBP1c, sterol regulatory element binding protein 1c; VLDL, very low-density lipoprotein.

SECTION

Financial support

PARAGRAPH

The Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis Clinical Research Network (NASH CRN) is supported by the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK) (grants U01DK061718, U01DK061728, U01DK061731, U01DK061732, U01DK061734, U01DK061737, U01DK061738, U01DK061730, U01DK061713).

Additional support is received from the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS) (grants UL1TR000439, UL1TR000436, UL1TR000006, UL1TR000448, UL1TR000100, UL1TR000004, UL1TR000423, UL1TR000058).

Lipoprotein samples were tested free of charge at LipoScience (now LabCorp) and the agreement was between LabCorp and VCU (Arun Sanyal) for NMR testing.

The analysis, interpretation and manuscript preparation were done by the authors and independent on LabCorp.

The FLINT trial was conducted by the NASH CRN and supported in part by a Collaborative Research and Development Agreement (CRADA) between NIDDK and Intercept Pharmaceuticals.

SECTION

Conflict of interest

PARAGRAPH

Mohammad Siddiqui: Advisory board member with Pfizer.

Mark Van Natta: None.

Margery Connelly: Employed by LabCorp®.

Raj Vuppalanchi: Grants from Intercept.

Brent Tetri: Consulting or advising relationships with Allergan, Arrowhead, ARTham, Blade, Boehringer Ingleheim, BMS, Coherus, Consynance, Durect, Enanta, Gelesis, Gilead, Intercept, Lipocine, Madrigal, Medimmune, Merck, Metacrine, Mundipharma, NGM, pH-Pharma, Prometheus, Siemens.

James Tonascia: None.

Cynthia Guy: Consulting agreements with several pharmaceutical companies including Immuron, Taiwan J, Madrigal, CymaBay, and NGM related to NASH and other chronic liver diseases, and her institution receives or has received research grants on her behalf from some these entities.

Rohit Loomba: Consultant or advisory board member for Arrowhead Pharmaceuticals, AstraZeneca, Bird Rock Bio, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol-Myer Squibb, Celgene, Cirius, CohBar, Conatus, Eli Lilly, Galmed, Gemphire, Gilead, Glympse bio, GNI, GRI Bio, Intercept, Ionis, Janssen Inc., Merck, Metacrine, Inc., NGM Biopharmaceuticals, Novartis, Novo Nordisk, Pfizer, Prometheus, Sanofi, Siemens, and Viking Therapeutics.

In addition, his institution has received grant support from Allergan, Boehringer-Ingelheim, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Cirius, Eli Lilly and Company, Galectin Therapeutics, Galmed Pharmaceuticals, GE, Genfit, Gilead, Intercept, Janssen, Madrigal Pharmaceuticals, Merck, NGM Biopharmaceuticals, NuSirt, Pfizer, Prometheus, and Siemens.

He is also co-founder of Liponexus, Inc.

PARAGRAPH

Srinivasan Dasarathy: None.

Julia Wattacheril: Paid consulting activities with Astra Zeneca and has received research support from Janssen, Genfit, Intercept, Galectin, Gilead, Zydus, Conatus, Shire.

Naga Chalasani: Ongoing consulting activities (or had in preceding 12 months) with NuSirt, Abbvie, Afimmune (DS Biopharma), Axovant, Allergan (Tobira), Madrigal, Shire, Coherus, Siemens, Centurion, and Genentech.

These consulting activities are generally in the areas of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and drug hepatotoxicity.

Dr. Chalasani receives research grant support from Exact Sciences, Intercept, Lilly, Galectin Therapeutics and Cumberland where his institution receives the funding.

Over the last decade, Dr. Chalasani has served as a paid consultant to more than 30 pharmaceutical companies and these outside activities have regularly been disclosed to his institutional authorities.

Arun J. Sanyal: Conatus, GenFit, Gilead, Mallinckrodt, Pfizer, Salix, Boehringer Ingelhiem, Novartis, Nimbus, Merck, Hemoshear, Sequana, Lilly, Novo Nordisk, Fractyl, Durect, Indalo, Allergan, Chemomab, Affimmune, Ardelyx, Teva, Terns, Enyo, Birdrock, Albrieo, Sanofi, Jannsen, Takeda, Zydus, BASF, Amra, Perspectum, OWL, Poxel, Servier, Second Genome, General Electric, 89 Bio, Immuron, Intercept.

Stock in Exhalenz, Akarna, GenFit, Hemoshear, Durect, indalo, Tiziana.

Owner of Sanyal Bio.

Research Grants: Conatus, Echosens-Sandhill, Gilead, Mallinckrodt, Salix, Novartis, Galectin, Bristol Myers, Sequana.

Royalties: Elsevier, UpToDate.

PARAGRAPH

Please refer to the accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.

SECTION

Authors’ contributions

PARAGRAPH

Mohammad Siddiqui: Conceptualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing.

Mark L Van Natta, formal analysis, Writing – review & editing.

Margery Connelly: Methodology, Writing – review & editing.

Raj Vupplanchi: Data curation, Writing – review & editing.

Brent A Neuschwander-Tetri: Data curation, Investigation, Writing – review & editing.

James Tonascia: Formal analysis, Writing – review & editing.

Cynthia Guy: Data curation, Methodology, Writing – review & editing.

Rohit Loomba: Data curation, Writing – review & editing.

Srinivasan Dasarathy: Data curation, Writing – review & editing.

Julia Wattacheril: Data curation, Writing – review & editing.

Naga Chalasani: Data curation, Writing – review & editing.

Arun J Sanyal: Conceptualization, Data curation.

Writing – review & editing

SECTION

Members of the NASH CRN

PARAGRAPH

PARAGRAPH

Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, OH: Daniela Allende, MD; Annette Bellar, MSLA; Jaividhya Dasarathy, MD; Srinivasan Dasarathy, MD; Arthur J. McCullough, MD; Revathi Penumatsa, MBBS, MPH; Jaspreet S. Reen, MBBS.

Columbia University, New York, NY: Joel E. Lavine, MD, PhD.

Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC: Manal F. Abdelmalek, MD, MPH; Mustafa Bashir, MD; Stephanie Buie; Anna Mae Diehl, MD; Cynthia Guy, MD; Christopher Kigongo, MB, CHB; Mariko Kopping, MS, RD; Dawn Piercy, MS, FNP; Naglaa Tawadrous.

Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN: Naga Chalasani, MD; Oscar W. Cummings, MD; Samer Gawrieh, MD; Linda Ragozzino, RN; Dawn Rank, RN; Niharika Samala, MD; Raj Vuppalanchi, MD.

Saint Louis University, St Louis, MO: Elizabeth M. Brunt, MD (2002–2008); Theresa Cattoor, RN; Danielle Carpenter, MD; Janet Freebersyser, RN; Debra King, RN (2004–2015); Jinping Lai, MD (2015–2016); Brent A. Neuschwander-Tetri, MD; Joan Siegner, RN (2004–2015); Susan Stewart, RN (2004–2015); Susan Torretta; Kristina Wriston, RN (2015).

Swedish Medical Center, Seattle, WA: Maria Cardona Gonzalez; Jodie Davila; Kris V. Kowdley, MD; Nizar Mukhtar, MD; Michelle Poitevin; Brook Quist; Sherilynn Soo.

University of California San Diego, San Diego, CA: Cynthia Behling, MD, PhD; Egbert Madamba; Rohit Loomba, MD, MHSc; Michael S. Middleton, MD, PhD; Claude Sirlin, MD.

University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA: Nathan M. Bass, MD, PhD (2002–2011); Danielle Brandman, MD, MAS; Ryan Gill, MD, PhD; Bilal Hameed, MD; Jacquelyn Maher, MD; Nicholas Slater, BA; Norah Terrault, MD, MPH; Ashley Ungermann, MS. University of Washington Medical Center, Seattle, WA: Matthew Yeh, MD, PhD.

Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA: Sherry Boyett, RN, BSN; Melissa J. Contos, MD; Velimir AC Luketic, MD; Arun J. Sanyal, MD; Jolene Schlosser, RN, BSN; Mohammad S. Siddiqui, MD.

Washington University, St. Louis, MO: Elizabeth M. Brunt, MD (2008–2015); Kathryn Fowler, MD (2012–2015)

PARAGRAPH

PARAGRAPH

National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD: David E. Kleiner, MD, PhD.

National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, Bethesda, MD: Edward C. Doo, MD; Sherry Hall, MS; Jay H. Hoofnagle, MD; Patricia R. Robuck, PhD, MPH (2002–2011); Averell H. Sherker, MD; Rebecca Torrance, RN, MS. Data Coordinating Center, Johns Hopkins University, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD: Patricia Belt, BS; Jeanne M. Clark, MD, MPH; John Dodge (2002–2018); Michele Donithan, MHS (2002–2017); Milana Isaacson, BS (2002–2018); Mariana Lazo, MD, PhD, ScM; Jill Meinert; Laura Miriel, BS; Emily P. Sharkey, MPH, MBA; Jacqueline Smith, AA; Michael Smith, BS; Alice Sternberg, ScM; James Tonascia, PhD; Mark L. Van Natta, MHS; Annette Wagoner; Laura A. Wilson, ScM; Goro Yamada, PhD, MHS, MHS, MMS; Katherine P. Yates, ScM.