10.1016/j.jasrep.2018.11.009

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Microwear analysis aiding excavation prioritization at the submerged Mesolithic settlement of Orehoved, Denmark

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Lithic microwear analysis is commonly applied when studying wear patterns on the edges of stone tools to infer their prehistoric use.

Wear, however, can occur on the surfaces of stone artefacts through a variety of natural as well as cultural processes.

Here, we report on the examination of wear on artefacts collected by a test-pit survey in 4–7 m of water in a locality of expected Kongemosian habitation near the port of Orehoved, Denmark (Fig. 1).

The results showed that artefacts from the two excavated stratigraphic layers were redeposited most likely from wave action and by erosion from water currents.

PARAGRAPH

The objectives of the research were:

To measure the amount of dorsal ridge rounding on artefacts from the sample area;

To assess if there was a large sub-assemblage of artefacts in well-preserved condition (showing very little ridge-wear) indicative of undisturbed deposits;

To evaluate the hypothesis that the deeper layer contained better preserved artefacts and that the artefacts in the upper layer showed greater evidence of disturbance;

To identify probable location(s) where artefacts could be found in situ or nearly so;

To evaluate the predictive potential of ridge-wear measurements for post-depositional movement.

SECTION

Orehoved, Denmark

PARAGRAPH

A new entry channel was planned at the port of Orehoved, Denmark because the current access route would be disrupted by the construction of a new bridge.

Shallow water test-pit sampling of underwater sediments was undertaken to assess if archaeological sites might be impacted by the proposed route of the new channel (Fig. 1).

The rapid sediment sampling approach, conducted with a mechanical excavator mounted on a barge, recovered over 750 flints (cf. Fiedler et al., 2018).

Based on typology and flint technology these artefacts were dated to the Kongemose Culture of the Southern Scandinavian Mesolithic, c. 8000 cal BP.

PARAGRAPH

The distribution of flint items was not uniform across the ca. 2.8 hectare survey area and, based on artefact quantities from the sample units, two areas were noted as archaeologically significant (Fig. 2).

Nonetheless, it was not clearly understood if these artefacts were virtually in situ or had shifted in the sediments to natural accumulation points.

A microscopic study of the lithic material was conducted to determine to what extent the artefacts from the various test-pits were modified by natural processes, possibly relating to erosion and re-deposition of settlement debris.

PARAGRAPH

Observations of the sediment blocks of about 1.0 m3 recovered from the test-pits, showed that two stratigraphic layers contained flint artefacts.

The lower layer was a stone-rich sand possibly having in situ or only lightly shifted material.

The upper layer was a coarse-grain marine gyttja.

Via inspection with naked eye and with the aid of a magnifying glass it was at an early stage realized that many of the artefacts from this stratum had rounded and rolled ridges likely as a consequence of sea floor erosion over the millennia subsequent to the transgression of the site.

SECTION

The Kongemosian

PARAGRAPH

The Southern Scandinavian Mesolithic is divided into three periods.

The Kongemosian follows the Maglemosian about 8400 cal BP and continues for around a thousand years, when it is replaced by the Ertebølle.

Trapeze shaped arrow points are characteristic of the period (Petersen, 1984; Fischer and Malm, 1997, Fig. 5M–O).

Its lithic component also includes large quantities of elegantly shaped blades produced by pressure flaking.

At Orehoved, the blades have an average length of 65 mm and there are examples extending 120 mm.

PARAGRAPH

During the Kongemose cultural period the world ocean rose from around 14 to ca. 2 m below the present sea-level (Christensen et al., 1997; Fischer, 2018b; cf. Rosentau et al., 2017).

Since habitation was highly focused on the coasts, examination of submerged settlements is important for an over-all understanding of this archaeological period (Fischer, 2018a; Fischer et al., 1987).

PARAGRAPH

Coastal fishing was a vital aspect of the Kongemosian economy (Enghoff, 1995; Fischer et al., 2007a, 2007b; Pedersen, 1997; Sørensen, 2017).

Consequently, many of the larger habitation sites were located right next to places in the coastal landscape where fish could easily be caught with the aid of stationary fishing fences judging out from the shore (Fischer, 1993, 1997).

The new navigation channel for Orehoved Harbour should cut right through an area that had such topographical characteristics during the Kongemose period, which is why the archaeological test-pitting of the area was arranged.

SECTION

Ridge-wear analysis

PARAGRAPH

Lithic microwear analysis is the microscopic examination of wear and fractures that form along the edges and surfaces of fine-grained siliceous stone artefacts.

Often, the principal aim of such studies is to improve understanding of how stone tools were used.

However, natural processes also produce wear features that can confound interpretation of use-wear (Keeley, 1980; Levi Sala, 1986a, 1986b; Stapert, 1976).

It has been shown that these natural wear features can aid in understanding site formation processes (e.g., Burroni et al., 2002; Donahue, 1994, 1998; Donahue and Burroni, 2004) and applications in studying site formation processes alongside study of tool use have increased over the past two decades (e.g., Donahue and Evans, 2012).

Nonetheless, it is important to remember that the more post-depositional processes have affected stone artefacts, the less information that can be recovered about their use.

PARAGRAPH

The study of post-depositional ridge wear has its origins in a study by Shackley (1974).

She used magnifications of 75× to study the amount of ridge rounding on handaxes recovered from riverine deposits in an attempt to improve understanding of their depositional environment.

Keeley (1980) referred to Shackley (1974) and indicated that microwear analysts need to ensure that assemblages are suitable for analysing artefact use.

He goes on to describe the method for measuring ridge width using a metallurgical microscope.

A modified version of the technique is used here.

PARAGRAPH

Dorsal ridges are produced at the time when previous flakes are detached from the core.

The ridge angle (profile view) is usually about 120°, but can range from nearly 90° to over 150°.

Dorsal ridges have extremely obtuse angles that are not appropriate for cutting or scraping.

Additionally, the sharp lateral edges of the flakes mean that it would be difficult to hold them in order to use the dorsal ridges for scraping.

PARAGRAPH

Dorsal ridges can be modified from processes other than tool use and post-depositional processes.

Long-term curation of a tool will allow incidental wear to accumulate.

Ridge wear can be produced by the handling of the tool during use and by hafting (Rots, 2003, 2004, 2010).

In both cases, the ridge wear will vary according to where contact with the hand or the haft occurs.

In other words, the use wear is not uniform or consistently proportionate to the surface topography unlike sediment wear that causes rounding of all protruding surfaces (cf. Donahue, 1988).

PARAGRAPH

Given the above exceptions, we suggest that wear on the dorsal ridges of unmodified flakes primarily results from post-depositional processes.

Likewise, extensive wear on the ridges of retouched tools likely results from post-depositional processes.

Measurement of dorsal ridge wear has been a long-term tool of the Lithic Microwear Research Laboratory for assessing the potential of a site assemblage for the study of artefact use.

These studies (e.g., Donahue, 1999, 2002; Donahue and Evans, 2009, 2011, 2013a, 2013b) of unmodified flakes from different contexts have been highly valuable in assessing the potential of a site or of the contexts of a site for use-wear research.

PARAGRAPH

The principal measurement used for studying ridge wear is ‘ridge rounding’.

Through the late 20th century to the present it is commonly measured with a metallurgical microscope with light directed and magnified through the objective onto the flint artefact under study (Fig. 3a).

When the light from the objective strikes a surface perpendicular to the beam of light, much light is reflected back through the objectives to the eyepieces.

When light strikes a surface that is not positioned perpendicular to the beam of light, very little light is reflected back.

Thus when the beam of light strikes a segment of a dorsal ridge, the only light reflected back is the ridgeline that lies approximately perpendicular to the beam of light (Fig. 3a).

If the ridgeline has been abraded, then a wider beam of light is reflected back.

As flint technologists might expect, there is almost no light reflected back from a freshly produced ridge (Fig. 4).

PARAGRAPH

Different microscopes will produce different measurement results, which probably results from the diameter of the light beam and objectives.

Further research is required to measure the variation between microscopes.

The technique was developed with metallurgical microscopes in the 1970s, however, new 3D microscopes, such as the Olympus LEXT systems, are also capable of providing ridge width values through reflected light (Fig. 3b) or through actual measurements of the surface roughness at the ridge.

Many of the 3D confocal microscopes can measure the rounding of the ridges very accurately; the Alicona Infinite Focus systems overlay circles of different diameters on the cross-section of the ridge to determine the best fit arc; the larger the diameter the more rounding has taken place.

Currently, simple metallurgical microscopes provide the fastest means of collecting ridge width measurements, but with increased automation it is expected that the speed of the 3D confocal microscopes will soon outperform the older metallurgical microscopes.

PARAGRAPH

Because the width of a ridgeline can vary greatly, it is important that at least ten measurements are taken along the length of the ridge.

The mean and standard deviation of these measurements provides a statistically valid estimate of the average amount of ridge rounding.

Experimental and applied research at the Lithic Microwear Research Laboratory at the University of Bradford has demonstrated that when ridge width measurements are over 4.5 μm then there is a loss of some use-wear data; for example, wear from meat, the most subtle and ephemeral of use-wear characteristics, becomes difficult to assess.

When ridge width measurements are >14.5 μm, virtually all evidence of use-wear is obliterated on the working edges.

Only occasionally does wear from intensive cutting of siliceous plant fibres (e.g., sickle gloss) remain identifiable (Donahue and Evans, 2013b; May et al., 1996).

SECTION

Method

PARAGRAPH

The Orehoved test-pit survey produced an assemblage of approximately 750 flint specimens.

These were removed from their bags and divided into two groups; those that have one or more dorsal ridges with angles of approximately 100–140° and a total minimum length of at least 10 mm, and those specimens that didn't meet these criteria, which were immediately returned to the bag.

Most of the rejected specimens were flint pebbles and tabular chunks that showed no evidence of human modification.

The remaining rejected artefacts were either very small flakes or quite rare large primary flakes with cortical dorsal surfaces.

The selected artefacts were viewed principally at 100× magnification with an Olympus KL-BH2-UMA metallurgical microscope with incident-light and long working-distance objectives.

Ridges displaying very little rounding were measured at 200× with measurements halved when recording.

The width of the dorsal ridge was measured using the width of the light-reflected ridge surface observed through the eye pieces (10×) using a reticule with a scale of 1.0 unit = 14.1 μm for 20× objectives.

Ten measurements were taken at random intervals, but at least 1.0 mm, along one or more ridges (e.g., Fig. 3b).

The mean and standard deviation were automatically calculated on the spreadsheet for each artefact as the data were entered.

Measurements were then rescaled into micrometres.

PARAGRAPH

Other microscopic and macroscopic characteristics associated with post-depositional modification were also recorded (following Burroni et al., 2002; Donahue, 1994; Donahue and Burroni, 2004), particularly thermal alteration, patina, and post-depositional residues.

Patinated artefacts were often attempted to be measured for ridge rounding, but about 30% were rejected because the white saltwater patina (leaching) creates a cloud-like appearance on the artefact surface, which makes microscopic features difficult to observe and measure.

Thermally altered artefacts were always examined if they had a ridge that met the above criteria.

The rounded ridges were statistically analysed for each layer in each test-pit to assess if some contexts had undergone little disturbance.

Such contexts would be of special concern when subsequently deciding where further archaeological excavation should eventually take place before the site was taken over by the developer.

SECTION

Results

PARAGRAPH

Of 758 flint specimens in the assemblage, precisely 500 artefacts were identified as suitable for analysis and were measured for ridge rounding.

The frequency distribution of average ridge rounding is most similar to a Chi-Squared distribution with one degree of freedom.

There are many dorsal ridges with very low values and a very long tail of high values.

Similar distributions occur for the ridges of artefacts within each stratum.

Ridge measurements are provided in the Mendeley Data Archive and at the website www.microwear.co.uk.

Table 1 provides the basic descriptive statistics for these data.

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

At the initiation of the wear study it was indicated that there were two strata containing artefacts in different kinds of context.

The 422 studied lithic artefacts from the lower layer of stone-rich sand might be in situ or only lightly shifted.

In contrast, the 49 studied lithic artefacts from the upper layer of coarse-grain marine gyttja were suspected of being redeposited.

If these hypotheses were true, then the average amount of wear on the ridges of the upper deposit should be significantly greater than that of the artefacts from the lower stratum.

PARAGRAPH

A one-direction Mann-Whitney test for two independent non-parametric samples was applied to test the hypothesis that the dorsal ridges in the upper stratum were on average wider than the dorsal ridges from the lower stratum.

A significance value of 0.05 for a one-tailed test was applied using SPSS Statistics for Windows, Version 22 (IBM Corp., 2013).

Twenty-nine of the 500 artefacts were not included in the analysis because it was uncertain with which layer they were associated.

The summary statistics are provided in Table 1 above.

PARAGRAPH

The Mann-Whitney U test produced a value of 8923 for U from the rank data summarized in Table 2, which resulted in a significance value (p-value) for a one-tailed hypothesis of 0.058 (Table 3; calculated as half of the reported two-tailed test result of 0.116 computed by SPSS).

Consequently, we accept the null hypothesis that there is no significant difference between the medians of the two samples (p ≥ 0.05).

Since the upper stratum artefacts had certainly shifted around in the sediments, the outcome of the statistical test implies that this was most likely also the case with the artefacts from the deeper stratum.

The challenge was then to pinpoint the localities with the greatest research potential.

PARAGRAPH

In preparation for further spatial analysis, the artefacts were assigned to ranks according to the ridge wear (rounding) values.

Regrouping the data values into six ranks as shown in Table 4 simplifies the presentation of the data and makes them easier to understand.

The lower valued ranks, which represent the narrower ridge widths or less rounded ridges, correspond to the interpretability of use-wear on working edges.

Higher ranks, representing greater ridge widths, are associated with the visibility of roundedness.

PARAGRAPH

The Bar Chart (Fig. 5) provides some visual support to the Mann-Whitney test results.

The frequencies of artefacts for Lower and Upper Layers vary fairly proportionately across the ranks.

It should also be noted that by collapsing the ridge wear values into ranks, a bimodal distribution results.

This is in part an artefact of the binning process, which put increasingly wider ranges of values within increasing-valued ranks.

PARAGRAPH

Aiming at predicting relatively undisturbed areas of the archaeological site, we focused our attention on test-pits that had relatively high frequencies of artefacts with very little rounding of ridges in the lower layer (Table 5).

They showed to be quite concentrated spatially, forming two clusters of pits.

Just four pits (two in each locality) account for 73 artefacts with minimally or mildly rounded ridges in the lower stratum (Fig. 5).

PARAGRAPH

To ensure that the frequency of artefacts in good condition was not simply a reflection of the artefact count, the percentages of artefacts in good condition were also mapped.

This shows the same general distribution pattern as in Fig. 6, with two clusters in the lower stratum, indicating that these are locations where some artefacts have shifted only slightly from their original position.

One cluster is located between F45 to F55 and north to Hul13.

The second cluster is about 80 m farther east in the area around units I007 and F140.

This latter area was determined to be outside the impact area of the channel development and therefore did not receive further archaeological investigation.

SECTION

Archaeological evaluation of the predicted site location

PARAGRAPH

Following the ridge-wear study, a round of manual archaeological excavation of square metre pits was undertaken in the vicinity of the above mentioned pits F45, F55, and Hul 13.

The aim was to reach a clearer understanding of stratigraphy, looking for artefact rich deposits of apparent undisturbed nature and searching for near-shore gyttja deposits containing organic cultural materials.

Such marine deposits were in fact located and readily became subject to closer examination.

This was performed by hand excavation with the use of suction dredges (Johansen and Ravn, 2018).

A total of 90 m2 was manually excavated (Fig. 7).

It revealed a stratigraphy with three well-defined layers containing Mesolithic habitation debris:

at the bottom, a marine gyttja with many artefacts in lithic and organic materials, all of which were found in situ and in pristine conditions

in the middle, a gravel and sand rich sediment with hundreds of artefacts per square metre all of which appear to have been washed out from the living floor (to the southwest) and redeposited here when the site was inundated

on the top, a coarse-grain marine gyttja with relatively few Mesolithic artefacts.

PARAGRAPH

The top layer of the hand excavation can be identified with the upper stratum of the mechanical test-pitting, while the middle layer corresponds to the lower stratum of the test-pit survey.

The bottom layer of the hand excavation was not observed in the initial survey.

A preliminary inspection of the flint ridges from the hand excavated middle layer indicates that they have mildly to minimally rounded ridges.

SECTION

Conclusion

PARAGRAPH

Archaeological examination of Stone Age sites in the seabed is demanding because of complications in achieving a quick overview and because of the significantly higher costs per unit examined.

Our study demonstrates that ridge-wear analysis in such circumstances can potentially provide valuable information for tactical decisions on where to focus when targeting areas and items in situ.

Ridge-wear analysis provided information about site formation processes leading to the reconsideration of the site stratigraphy.

Ridge-wear analysis indicated that artefacts from both of the initially identified layers showed similar frequency distributions of ridge rounding and probably had similar depositional histories.

The ridge-wear analysis was not successful in identifying in situ archaeological deposits, but only because the strata examined did not contain in situ archaeological deposits.

These two strata, however, did contain a large number of artefacts with dorsal ridges in very good condition.

While one should use only artefacts with extremely mild and virtually unmodified ridgelines to predict the location of in situ deposits, this study demonstrates that artefacts in such condition do not guarantee that they are in primary context.

PARAGRAPH

The archaeological work at Orehoved illustrates how mobile artefacts can move post-depositionally without showing much wear or ridge rounding.

Such a finding should not come as a surprise to microwear analysts who are able to assess tool use even of artefacts known to have shifted out of original context.

Such movement of artefacts appears to have taken place at many submerged settlements in Denmark even in wave protected locations.

During inundation wave action can gently wash artefacts from the former living floor out into shallow water and deposit them on top of near-shore marine sediments with cultural material tossed out from the habitation area (Fischer, 2011, Fig. 24.4).

The implication is that greater understanding of the inundation process is needed to ensure that ridge-wear analysis is suitably sensitive to distinguish in situ deposits from those that have been redeposited in submerged settings.