10.1016/j.jhep.2019.10.002

ABSTRACT

TITLE

Impact of cardiac function, refractory ascites and beta blockers on the outcome of patients with cirrhosis listed for liver transplantation

PARAGRAPH

Whether non-selective beta blockers (NSBBs) are deleterious in patients with end-stage cirrhosis and refractory ascites has been widely debated.

We hypothesized that only the subset of patients on the liver transplant waiting list who had impaired cardiac performance would be at increased risk of mortality if receiving NSBBs.

PARAGRAPH

This study included 584 consecutive patients with cirrhosis evaluated for transplantation between 1999 and 2014.

All patients had right heart catheterization with hemodynamic measurements at evaluation.

Fifty percent received NSBBs.

Refractory ascites was present in 33%.

Cardiac performance was assessed by left ventricular stroke work index (LVSWI).

Waiting list mortality without liver transplantation was explored using competing risk analysis.

PARAGRAPH

LVSWI was significantly lower in patients with refractory ascites.

In multivariate analysis using competing risk, refractory ascites, NSBBs and LVSWI were associated with waiting list mortality in the whole population, with a statistically significant interaction between NSBBs and LVSWI.

The most discriminant value of LVSWI was 64.1 g-m/m2.

In the final model, refractory ascites (subdistribution hazard ratio 1.52; 95% CI 1.01–2.28; p = 0.0083) and treatment by NSBBs with LVSWI <64.1 g-m/m2 (subdistribution hazard ratio 1.96; 95% CI 1.32–2.90; p = 0.0009) were significantly associated with waiting list mortality, taking into account serum sodium and the model for end-stage liver disease score.

PARAGRAPH

This study suggests that compromised cardiac performance is more common in patients with refractory ascites and that NSBBs are deleterious in cirrhotic patients with compromised cardiac performance.

These results highlight the prognostic value of cardiac function in patients with end-stage cirrhosis.

