10.1016/j.jhep.2019.06.030

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Generation of expandable human pluripotent stem cell-derived hepatocyte-like liver organoids

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Human cell-based and personalized in vitro liver models are urgently needed for drug efficacy and toxicity tests in pre-clinical drug development.

Although the liver is a representative organ with a native regenerative potential in vivo, primary human hepatocytes (PHHs), which are considered the gold standard for evaluating hepatic metabolism, are limited by their loss of proliferative capacity and long-term functionality in vitro.1

To overcome the limitations of PHHs, various approaches have been developed, including genetic modification,2 3D culture combined with tissue engineering technologies,1,3–7 and defined medium compositions.8,9

However, the development of alternative and sustainable cell sources to recapitulate the function of native liver remains challenging.

PARAGRAPH

Stem cells are a useful alternative source of liver cells, which can be obtained from various methods, including the differentiation of hepatic cells from pluripotent stem cells (PSCs),10–15 direct conversion,16–19 and from tissue stem cells.20–23

Importantly, compared with conventional 2D cultures, 3D configurations, such as spheroids or organoids confer advantages for the differentiation ability of stem cells and the maintenance of metabolic function.5

Liver bud generation from PSCs24–28 and liver organoid generation from primary liver tissues21,22 are leading-edge technologies in the development of stem cell-based in vitro 3D liver models.

However, as its name implies, liver buds from PSCs present fetal characteristics in vitro before transplantation, and most importantly, it is not a proliferative system.

Tissue-derived hepatic organoids have limitations in accessibility to human tissue and a narrow differentiation potential, although these organoids are expandable and maintain mature functionality.

Therefore, we have adapted both technologies to allow for the generation of proliferative and more mature hepatic organoids derived from PSCs, including human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) and induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), which are a renewable source of parenchymal and non-parenchymal tissue cells.

In genomic and functional analyses, our hepatocyte-like liver organoids manifested more mature phenotypes compared with those of 2D differentiated hepatocytes and tissue-derived hepatic organoids.

Notably, our system reproducibly provides a robust hepatic model for toxicity prediction, regenerative and inflammatory responses, modeling for diseases such as hepatic steatosis, and drug screening.

SECTION

Materials and methods

SECTION

Hepatocyte differentiation/organoid generation

PARAGRAPH

Hepatic differentiation was performed by using previously described protocols with modifications.10,25,26

For definitive endoderm differentiation, PSCs were cultured on Matrigel-coated dishes under PSC medium for 3 days, and then the medium was exchanged with RPMI 1640 (Thermo Fisher; 11875-093) supplemented with 1xB-27™ without insulin (Thermo Fisher; A1895601) and 100 ng/ml human activin A (PeproTech; 120-14e) and incubated for 6 days.

For hepatic endoderm differentiation, the medium was exchanged with RPMI 1640 supplemented with 1xB-27 (Thermo Fisher; 17504-044), 10 ng/ml bFGF, and 20 ng/ml human BMP-4 (PeproTech; 120-05ET) for 4 days under 5% hypoxia conditions.

For hepatic maturation, the medium was exchanged with Hepatocyte Culture Medium (Lonza; CC-3198) without EGF, diluted with Endothelial Cell Growth Medium-2 (Lonza; CC-3162) (1:1) supplemented with 2.5% FBS, 100 nM dexamethasone (Sigma-Aldrich; D4902), 20 ng/ml OSM (R&D system; 295-OM-050), and 10 ng/ml of HGF (PeproTech; 100-39) for 4 days under hypoxia and then an additional 8 days of culture under normoxia.

Approximately 9 to 12 days after hepatic maturation, 3D spherical structures appeared over 2D monolayers of mature hepatocytes.

The floating cysts were collected and solidified with Matrigel as a dome, and then hepatic medium (HM) was added.

The medium compositions are shown in Table S1.

SECTION

Organoid culture

PARAGRAPH

Organoids were routinely maintained in HM, and the medium was replaced every 3 days.

The organoids were mechanically passaged every 7 days; they were washed with cold PBS to remove the Matrigel and split into small pieces by a surgical blade under a dissecting microscope.

The passaged organoids were then resuspended in Matrigel at a 1:3–1:10 ratio.

Alternatively, organoids were chemically passaged with Gentle Cell Dissociation Reagent (Stem Cell Technology; ST07174) by pipetting approximately 15 times.

For cryopreservation, the passaged organoids were mixed with mFreSR™ (Stem Cell Technology; 05855), and freezing/thawing was performed by standard procedures.

After thawing, 10 μM Y-27632 (Tocris; 1254) was added to the medium for 3 days.

Tissue-derived organoids were generated from IRB-approved human adult liver tissue according to a previously described protocol.21

For further differentiation of hepatic organoids, HM-cultured organoids were incubated under expansion medium (EM) supplemented with 20 ng/ml BMP7 (PeproTech; 120-03) for 2–3 days and then under differentiation medium (DM) for an additional 6 days.

The medium compositions are shown in Table S1.

SECTION

Functional studies

PARAGRAPH

To analyze glycogen storage, organoids were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (Biosesang; P2031), cryo-protected in 30% sucrose, and frozen in optimal-cutting-temperature compound (Sakura Finetek; 4583).

Frozen sections were sliced to a thickness of 10 μm at −20 °C with a cryostat microtome (Leica).

Sectioned samples were stained with periodic acid-Schiff (IHC World; IW-3009) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

For indocyanine green (ICG) uptake and release, organoids were washed with cold PBS to remove the Matrigel and incubated with 1 mg/ml of ICG (Sigma; I2633) for 15 min at 37 °C in 5% CO2.

Images of ICG uptake were taken under a microscope, then the organoids were gently washed 3 times with PBS, and fresh medium was added.

After 1 h of incubation at 37 °C in 5% CO2, images of ICG release were taken under a microscope.

For albumin (ALB), α1-antitrypsin (AAT), and urea quantitation, medium was collected at 48 h after the medium change and analyzed using a Human Albumin ELISA Kit (Bethyl Laboratories; E80-129), Human Alpha-1-Antitrypsin ELISA Quantitation Kit (GenWaybio; GWB-1F2730), or Urea Assay Kit (Cell Biolabs, Inc.; STA-382) following the manufacturer’s instructions.

The absorbance was detected by a Spectra Max M3 microplate reader (Molecular Devices), and the data were normalized by the cell number.

For CYP activity, CYP enzymes were induced by treatment with each inducer (CYP3A4; 20 μM rifampicin, 100 μM acetaminophen, and 10 μM nifedipine and CYP1A2; 150 μM omeprazole) for 48 h. CYP enzyme activities were measured after 3 h of incubation with each subtype-specific substrate using a P450-Glo Assay Kit (Promega; V9002 for 3A4 and V8422 for 1A2).

Luciferase activity was then measured using a luminometer (Victor X Light, Perkin Elmer) and the data were normalized by the cell number.

For the functional polarization assay, organoids were removed from the Matrigel and incubated with culture media supplemented with 10 μg/ml CDFDA (Sigma; 21884) and 1 μg/ml Hoechst 33342 (Invitrogen; 62249) for 30 min at 37 °C in 5% CO2.

The organoids were gently washed twice with cold PBS containing calcium and magnesium.

Culture medium was added and then fluorescence images were obtained under a confocal microscope at 37 °C in 5% CO2.

For bile acid quantification, the organoids were lysed by homogenization with PBS and then analyzed using a Total Bile Acid Assay Kit (Biovision; K209-100).

The observance was measured by a Spectra Max M3 microplate reader, and the data were normalized by the cell number.

SECTION

Statistical analysis

PARAGRAPH

All figures show representative data of more than 3 independent biological replicates.

The graphs represent the mean ± SEM.

Quintuplicate samples were used for the oxygen consumption rate (OCR) analysis; triplicate samples were used for the PCR analysis, ELISA, metabolite analysis, toxicity test, Nile red and Oil red O staining, and CYP activity (technical replicates).

Student’s t test was used to evaluate the inter-group comparisons, and p <0.05 indicated statistical significance.

All analyses of statistical significance were performed by comparison with the control group unless otherwise indicated.

SECTION

Results

SECTION

Generation of expandable human hepatic organoids from PSCs

PARAGRAPH

To obtain mature hepatocytes from PSCs, we applied conventional 2D differentiation protocols based on the liver developmental process described by the Duncan10 and Taniguchi25 groups with slight modifications (Fig. 1A).

In brief, fully characterized and integration-free human iPSCs (Fig. S1A-D) or hESCs were differentiated in a stepwise fashion into definitive endoderm (DE)-, hepatic endoderm (HE)-differentiated cells, immature hepatocytes (IH), and mature hepatocytes (MH) (Fig. S1E).

The DE differentiation process, which is an initial and important intermediate stage of hepatic development during organogenesis, was optimized (Fig. S2A) by treatment with B27 without insulin and Activin A29 based on the mRNA (Fig. S2B) and protein (Fig. S2C) expression of DE markers, such as SOX17 and FOXA2.

The expression of each stage-specific marker during differentiation was examined at both the mRNA (Fig. S3A) and protein (Fig. S3B) levels.

Approximately 22 days after starting differentiation, 3D spherical structures appeared over 2D monolayers of MHs (Fig. 1B) and a cuboidal cell morphology similar to that of parenchymal liver cells was clearly recognized on the surface of the globular structure (Fig. 1C).

This 3D structure was comparable to that of tissue-derived liver organoids comprising a single-layered epithelium;22,30 therefore, we adapted culture systems for human liver organoids from Clevers’ group.22

However, to simultaneously intensify the self-renewal potential and hepatic characteristics of organoids, we modified the media composition of the EM by additional treatment with basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), oncostatin M (OSM), insulin-transferrin-selenium (ITS), and dexamethasone, except for R-spondin and fibroblast growth factor 10 (FGF 10), and designated it HM (Table S1).

In the Matrigel-embedded HM culture condition, 3D organoids were significantly enlarged during 5 days of culture (Fig. S4A), could be passaged either by mechanical or enzymatic splitting (Fig. S4B), and regrew well even after freezing and thawing (Fig. S4C).

The organoids were capable of self-renewal both in suspension and in Matrigel (Fig. 1D and Video S1) and expanded well for long-term culture (Fig. 1E).

The organoids could be passaged more than 24 times over 5 months (Fig. S4D), stably maintained a normal karyotype over 3 months after in vitro culture (Fig. S4E), and matched the short tandem repeat prolife of original fibroblasts (Fig. S4F).

Remarkably, E-cadherin-stained epithelial cells exhibited a Ki67-positive proliferative state with strong expression of ALB (Fig. 1F).

SECTION

Characterization of human hepatic organoids from PSCs

PARAGRAPH

Next, the characteristics of established 3D organoids were compared among the iPSCs, HEs, and 2D differentiated mature hepatocytes (2D MHs) (Fig. 2).

When the gene expression levels of stage-specific markers were compared with the 2D MHs, the organoids exhibited lower expression of the pluripotency marker NANOG, maintained the expression of the adult stem cell marker LGR5, and expressed similar or higher levels of the ductal markers SOX9 and CK19 and the MH markers ALB, TTR, CK18, and RBP4 (Fig. 2A).

High expression levels of epithelial markers (E-cadherin and ZO1), hepatocyte markers (HNF4A, ALB, AAT, and PEPCK), a bile salt efflux transporter (MRP4), ductal markers (CK19 and SOX9), and an adult stem cell marker (LGR5) were observed in the HM-cultured organoids by immunofluorescence (Fig. 2B).

A detailed metabolism study associated with glucose, amino acid, and lipid metabolism was performed during organoid generation, and the distinct metabolic features among iPSCs, HEs, 2D MHs, and organoids are explained in Figs. S5 and S6.

Highly proliferating iPSCs represented dominant glycolytic activity, and the tricarboxylic acid cycle and oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) pathways were increased upon differentiation in a liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS)-based metabolite analysis (Fig. S5) and whole-genome transcriptome analysis (Fig. S6).

We also established 2 hESC line-derived organoids from H1 and H9 cells and 2 in-house iPSC line-derived organoids from human foreskin fibroblasts (iPS_1) and human liver fibroblasts (iPS_2) (Fig. S7).

The organoids were reproducibly generated without interline variability in the organoid generation efficiency, morphological characteristics (Fig. S7A), self-renewal capacity, and marker expression (Fig. S7B).

Representatively, the ALB+ mature hepatocyte population was quantified in the iPS_1-derived organoids, which accounted for 38.63% in the FACS analysis (Fig. 2C).

SECTION

Differentiation of human hepatic organoids towards mature characteristics

PARAGRAPH

Organoids were found to be more differentiated under defined culture conditions, which involved culturing with EM and subsequently with DM22 (Table S1).

As Huch et al. reported, the addition of BMP7 with EM before the DM treatment was the most effective condition for increasing the expression of ALB and CYP3A4 (Fig. S8A and B, condition e).

We then optimized the time course of differentiation based on ALB secretion (Fig. S8C and D), which allowed us to finally refine the differentiation condition presented in Fig. 3A (Fig. S8C and D, condition i).

Under any condition, the organoids secreted much more ALB compared with a 3D culture of differentiated HepaRG cells, a widely used liver progenitor cell line31,32 (Fig. S8D).

EM-cultured organoids presented an enlarged spherical structure, and DM-cultured organoids had a smaller and packed morphology compared with that of HM-cultured organoids (Fig. 3B).

The differentiated organoids (DM) expressed sufficient levels of mature hepatocyte makers, such as ALB, TTR, and cytochrome p450-3A4 (CYP3A4) and ductal marker CK19, compared with PHHs and human liver tissue (Fig. 3C).

High expression levels of E-cadherin, HNF4A, ZO1, and PEPCK were maintained in both EM- and DM-cultured organoids (Fig. 3D).

The expression of the mature hepatocyte markers ALB, AAT, and MRP2 (bile transporter) was strongly enhanced in DM, whereas the expression of CK19, LGR5, and SOX9 was decreased in DM compared with that in EM (Fig. 3D).

The gene expression levels of LGR5 and SOX9 also showed greater decreases in the DM condition than the EM (Fig. S8E).

Quantitatively, the ALB+ mature hepatocyte population occupied 53.85% of EM and 79.44% of DM in the FACS analysis (Fig. 3E).

Upon differentiation, the organoids revealed more functionally mature hepatic cell characteristics (Fig. 4).

Accumulated glycogen was strongly detected in differentiated organoids by periodic acid-Schiff staining (Fig. 4A) and ICG uptake and release, which was used as a functional assessment for human liver transplantation,33 was functional for 15 min of incubation (Fig. 4B and Fig. S9A).

However, undifferentiated iPSCs did not uptake ICG at all, even 1 h after incubation (Fig. S9B).

The secretion of ALB was potently increased in differentiated organoids compared with that under either the 2D MH or HM conditions (Fig. 4C), which is consistent with the level of PHHs.

The secretion of AAT was significantly higher in both the HM- and DM-cultured organoids than in the 2D MHs or PHHs (Fig. 4D).

The levels were 6- to 8-fold higher than those from human liver tissue-derived organoids as reported by Clevers’ group.22

Urea production was also increased in differentiated organoids (Fig. 4E).

Notably, the gene expression levels of essential CYP families, which are important in drug metabolism and toxicity and include CYP3A4, 1A2, 2A6, and 2E1, were enhanced in the HM-cultured organoids compared with the levels in the 2D MHs (Fig. S10A).

Interestingly, the expression of CYP3A7, which is a fetal counterpart of CYP3A434 occupying a major proportion of CYP-mediated drug metabolism, was distinctly decreased in the organoids compared with the expression in the 2D MHs (Fig. S10A), suggesting the promotion of hepatic maturation in the organoids.

The basal CYP3A4 activity of organoids was incomparable with that of the 2D HepG2 cells, which was strongly induced by treatment with rifampicin, acetaminophen (APAP), and nifedipine (Fig. S10B).

Thus, we used nifedipine to induce CYP3A4 for further drug metabolism studies.

The expression of CYP3A4 was enriched in the DM-cultured organoids compared with that in the 2D MHs and HM-cultured organoids and was potently increased by nifedipine induction (Fig. 4F).

Higher CYP3A4 activity was observed in both nifedipine-induced HM- and DM-cultured organoids, although it did not reach the level of PHH activity (Fig. 4G).

The functional activity of CYP3A4 determined by the drug clearance potential of the remaining nifedipine in the supernatants was reduced in the organoids compared with that in the 2D MHs (Fig. 4H), indicating the increased detoxifying function of the organoids.

Moreover, even HM-cultured organoids directly hydroxylated testosterone into 6β-hydroxytestosterone (Fig. 4I), revealing the CYP3A4-mediated functionally mature drug-metabolizing activity of the HM-cultured organoids.

In addition, polarized epithelial cells with bile canaliculi-like structures were well recognized in differentiated organoids by CDFDA staining (Fig. 4J), which is known to be barely detectable in the 2D monolayer culture systems.35

Polarized epithelial cells were detected in only 21% of the 2D MHs and 28% of the PHHs in 10 fields of each group we photographed (Fig. S10C).

Overall, these data revealed that the human hepatic organoids differentiated in our system exhibit functionally mature hepatocyte-like characteristics.

SECTION

Transcriptome profiles and functional assessment of human hepatic organoids

PARAGRAPH

Next, to further validate the maturity potential of the organoids, we analyzed their molecular profiles.

We previously developed a liver-specific gene expression panel (LiGEP) algorithm, which is an RNA-sequencing-based validation platform that quantitatively evaluates the differentiation status of hepatocyte models and presents the degree of liver similarity.36

Although the 2D MHs revealed liver similarity scores of 31.18%, the organoids presented similarities of 41.94%, 45.16%, and up to 60.22% under HM-, EM-, and DM-culture conditions, respectively (Fig. 5A).

The levels of expressed genes in each sample are presented in Fig. 5B, and the list is provided in Table S2.

The whole-genome transcriptome analysis revealed 4 significant clusters in which genes were highly expressed in human liver tissue (cluster 1), in the organoids compared with iPSCs and 2D MHs (cluster 2), in DM-cultured organoids (cluster 3), and in iPSCs (cluster 4) (Fig. S11A).

Cluster 1 contained complement component genes, such as C3 and C1S, resulting from the lack of an immune system in an in vitro liver model.

Cluster 2 genes enriched in the organoids similar to the liver, contained gene sets for drug metabolism including phase I and II enzymes, peroxisome, the FOXA2 and FOXA3 transcription factor network related to liver regeneration, lipid metabolism including retinoid and steroid metabolism (Fig. S11B), as well as well-known hepatocyte markers, such as TTR, HNF1A, HNF4A, and SERPINA1 (AAT1) (Fig. 5C).

Cluster 3 contained hepatic progenitor markers such as AFP, KRT19, and DLK1, and reflected less differentiation characteristics of organoids than adult liver tissue (Fig. S11A).

As expected, cluster 4 contained pluripotency markers such as SOX2, POU5F1 (OCT4), and LIN28A (Fig. S11C).

Gene sets related to cell division were enriched in the gene ontology map of cluster 4 (Fig. S11D), and mitotic DNA replication-related pathways were augmented in the iPSCs (Fig. S11E).

Additional details from cluster 2 indicated that gene sets for lipid, cholesterol, and alcohol metabolic processes, organic substance catabolic processes, and cell secretion were enriched in the gene ontology map (Fig. 5D), while cholesterol biosynthesis and complement and coagulation cascades were the top 2 pathways augmented in the organoids (Fig. 5E).

Furthermore, we analyzed enriched pathways in differentiated organoids compared with those of 2D MHs, and the pathways involved in OXPHOS, bile acid metabolism, fatty acid metabolism (Fig. 5F), xenobiotic metabolism, coagulation, and peroxisome (Fig. S11F) were the top-ranked subset signatures of DM-cultured organoids.

The expression of representative genes in each pathway was confirmed by real-time PCR (Fig. S12A).

Surprisingly, the OCR as a surrogate of mitochondrial OXPHOS activity was potently increased in the organoids compared with that in the 2D MHs normalized by cell numbers (Fig. 5G), while basal and maximal respiration and respiration capacity were all remarkably higher in the organoids than in the 2D MHs (Fig. 5H).

These real-time monitoring bioenergetics profiles revealed that both mitochondria- and glycolysis-dependent ATP production rates were increased in the organoids compared with those in the 2D MHs (Fig. S12B), resulting in an elevated total ATP production rate in the organoids (Fig. S12C).

More importantly, the OCR of HM- or DM-cultured organoids was similar to that of adult liver tissue-derived hepatic organoids (Fig. 5G and Fig. S13).

Tissue-derived organoids were also well established (Fig. S13A) and differentiated (Fig. S13B), but the growth rate and differentiation response were slightly reduced and the level and rate of ALB production in the tissue-derived organoids were lower than those in our PSC-derived organoids (Fig. S13C).

Next, the bile acid production level was also heightened in the differentiated organoids compared with that in the HepG2 cells or 2D MHs (Fig. 5I), suggesting functional competence of the PSC-derived organoids.

Therefore, our system acted as a pertinent platform of a functionally mature liver model and allowed us to test applications of toxicity prediction, disease modeling, and drug screening.

These applications were performed under the HM condition because HM-cultured organoids have enough matured hepatic functionality over long-term culture, and it is a timely and cost-effective condition for further applications because it does not need an additional maturation process with EM and DM.

SECTION

Toxicological outcomes prediction using human hepatic organoids

PARAGRAPH

In transcriptome profiles, organoids potently expressed phase I drug-metabolizing CYP enzymes and phase II detoxification enzymes at a level similar to that of liver tissue (Fig. 6A), which is rapidly lost2 in the 2D cultured-hepatocyte models.

The activities of CYP1A2 (Fig. 6B) were well induced by omeprazole treatment in the HM-cultured organoids as well as CYP3A4 (Fig. 4G), although it did not reach the level of PHH activity.

Thus, we compared the toxicity profiles of CYP3A4- and CYP1A2/2E1-mediated hepatotoxic drugs (troglitazone and APAP, respectively) between the 2D MHs and HM-cultured organoids (Fig. S14).

While the control compound was cytotoxic (rotenone) or safe (dexamethasone) in the 2D MHs and organoids, the toxicity responses against troglitazone and APAP were different between the 2D and 3D models (Fig. 6C and Fig. S14A-D).

The toxic concentration (TC50) based on cell viability clearly showed the toxic sensitivity of the organoids compared with that of the 2D MHs (Fig. 6D and Fig. S14E).

The sensitivity was further confirmed by real-time monitoring of reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation, glutathione (GSH) content, and nuclei structure in a chronic exposure model (Fig. S15).

Troglitazone, an antidiabetic drug, was withdrawn from the market due to serious idiosyncratic hepatotoxicity, and it presented cytotoxicity with the 2 μM treatment, which did not reach the level of that with the maximal human exposure concentration (Cmax = 6.29 μM), i.e. a clinically relevant dose37 (Fig. S15A).

Next, we compared the effects of 2 structurally related antibiotics: trovafloxacin, which was withdrawn from the market due to patient death from liver failure; and levofloxacin, which is the non-toxic analogue of trovafloxacin.38,39

As expected, levofloxacin did not show cytotoxicity over the Cmax (23.8 μM), regardless of the 2D or 3D model (Fig. S16A and C).

However, trovafloxacin led to a significant decrease in the cell viability of the organoids (Fig. S16B), which was not identified in the 2D conventional pre-clinical models.37

Interestingly, 0.8 μM and 4 μM trovafloxacin treatments potently reduced the cell numbers in the HM-cultured organoids, while there was little or no toxicity in the 2D MHs at these concentrations (Fig. 6E).

The non-toxic analogue, levofloxacin, only presented toxicity at the highest concentration tested (100 μM), which produced a 36% decrease in the cell viability of the organoids (Fig. 6F).

Most importantly, real-time monitoring of mitochondrial toxicity based on the OCR precisely indicated the impairment of mitochondrial respiration by trovafloxacin at a low dose of treatment, such as 0.8 μM (Fig. 6G) and 4 μM (Fig. 6H), while almost no toxicity was detected at these concentrations for levofloxacin, and a mild inhibitory effect was exhibited only with the 100 μM treatment (Fig. S16D).

Therefore, these data indicate that human hepatocyte-like liver organoids retain their native drug-metabolizing activity and susceptibility to toxicity and thus could be used as a potential model to evaluate drug toxicity.

SECTION

Regenerative and inflammatory response in human hepatic organoids

PARAGRAPH

Next, we analyzed the recovery potential and inflammatory response of our organoids after treatment with high-dose APAP (Fig. 7A) because a change in regenerative capacity is one of the main characteristics of liver damage.

After 5 days of 20 mM APAP treatment, organoids presented severe morphological damage (Fig. 7B), though they recovered well by day 7 when the medium was changed on day 4.5, after 60 h of APAP treatment (Fig. 7A).

In time-lapse imaging, an organoid badly damaged by APAP treatment, as shown by the black small sphere, recovered remarkably well after the change of medium (Video S2).

Damaged organoids recovered well in terms of organoid size (Fig. 7C) and the cell cycle (Fig. S17A), and from apoptosis (Fig. 7B) after the change of medium.

Although niche cells, including immune cells, are not present in our organoid system, simple epithelial responses, such as damage-associated molecular patterns, which have been reported to induce inflammation and then contribute to regeneration or pathological injury,40 were found, and an increase of ROS production upon APAP treatment was detected (Fig. 7D and Fig. S17B).

The decreased expression and cytosolic translocation of high-mobility group box 1 protein (HMGB1) and diminished expression of Ki67, E-cadherin, and mitochondria marker Tom20 were observed in organoids after 5 days or 60 h of 20 mM APAP, although expression levels recovered close to the control level after APAP was removed (Fig. 7D).

The expression of the autophagy marker LC3B was more strongly induced by 60 h of APAP treatment than by 5 days of the treatment, which presented a similar pattern as the ATP contents (Fig. 7E) and GSH/GSSG ratio (Fig. 7F).

Long-term damage conditions may prevent autophagy-dependent recovery.

Consistently, expression of pro-inflammatory mediators IL-1β, IL-6, and IL-8 and pathological mediators TNFα and FasL were strongly induced in the APAP-treated organoids, although the expression of an anti-inflammatory mediator IL-10 was remarkably enhanced on day 5 of the recovery condition (Fig. 7G).

These results demonstrate that our human hepatocyte-like liver organoids could be a useful model for understanding regenerative and simple inflammatory responses after hepatotoxic injury.

SECTION

Human hepatic organoids for modeling steatosis pathology and drug screening

PARAGRAPH

Finally, we developed a steatosis model through excess treatment with oleate and palmitate, the most abundant fatty acid (FA) found in the human liver,30 to recapitulate the liver pathology (Fig. 8) because gene sets for FA metabolism, including FA uptake (FABP1, ACSL5, and CD36), hydrolysis (MGLL), and β-oxidation (ACADVL, HADHB, and ETFDH), were enriched in the transcriptome profiles of organoids (Fig. 5D-F, Fig. 8A, Fig. S6e, Fig. S11B, and Fig. S12A), and metabolites involved in lipid metabolism were distinctly increased in the organoid (Fig. S5k).

Treatment with 0.8 mM oleate for 3 days increased the intracellular lipid accumulation compared with that after treatment with the bovine serum albumin (BSA) control; however, the combination treatment with 0.5 mM oleate and 0.25 mM palmitate more potently induced lipid accumulation, as evidenced by a dark morphology (Fig. S18A).

Under the DM condition, increased Oil red O and Nile red stained lipid droplets were observed in the untreated- or BSA treated-control compared to the HM controls (Fig. S18B).

The gene expression level differences of FASN, FABP1, PLIN2, and SREBP were a 9.07-, 7.16-, 4.86-, and 1.98-fold increase in the HM condition, but a 1.33-, 1.89-, 2.98-, and 1.31-fold increase in the DM condition compared with BSA, respectively (Fig. S18C).

Thus, we performed steatosis modeling in the HM condition (Fig. 8) because responses upon FA treatment were clearly more distinguishable in the HM than the DM condition, and HM does not require at least 6 days of additional maturation with DM.

In this condition, glucose uptake (Fig. S19A) and consumption (Fig. S19B) and glycogen contents (Fig. S19C) were decreased by the FA treatment, while the expression of gluconeogenesis involving genes (Fig. S19D) and glucose synthesis stimulated by glucagon (Fig. S19E) were increased in the FA-treated organoids.

However, inflammatory responses were not induced in our simple steatosis model without immune cells (Fig. S19F and I), although the ATP contents (Fig. S19G) and GSH/GSSG ratio (Fig. S19H) were slightly decreased by the FA treatment while inflammatory signaling, including cytokines and chemokines, was strongly increased by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or carbon tetrachloride (CCl4) treatment (Fig. S19I).

The steatosis induction was aggravated by additional treatment with etomoxir, an irreversible inhibitor of carnitine palmitoyltransferase-1 (CPT1), by blocking the carnitine shuttle that transports FAs to the mitochondrial membrane for β-oxidation.30

Thus, the FA+etomoxir treatment promoted darkening of the organoids (Fig. S20A) and significant accumulation of intracellular lipid droplets observed by bright field microscopy and Nile red staining (Fig. 8B).

The intracellular triglyceride concentration was indeed strongly increased by the FA+etomoxir treatment compared with that in either the BSA control or FA treatment alone (Fig. 8C), and functionally, the mitochondrial respiration as determined by the OCR was extensively decreased by the FA+etomoxir treatment (Fig. 8D).

Conversely, the steatosis induction was greatly ameliorated by treatment with L-carnitine by promoting mitochondrial carnitine shuttle.

The FA+L-carnitine treatment obviously improved the phenotype of the organoids (Fig. S20A), and the lipid accumulation was potently decreased by the FA+L-carnitine treatment compared with the FA treatment alone (Fig. 8B and C).

Furthermore, the mitochondrial OCR was clearly recovered by the FA+L-carnitine treatment, while the FA-treated organoids presented a functionally impaired OCR (Fig. 8D).

In addition, we applied an antidiabetic drug, metformin, based on its function in decreasing hepatic steatosis.41,42

The FA+metformin treatment slightly recovered the morphology (Fig. S20A) and lipid accumulation, as assessed by staining with Nile red (Fig. 8B and Fig. S20B) and Oil red O (Fig. S20B), although it had little effect on the decrease in triglycerides (Fig. 8C) under our conditions.

Finally, we applied the organoids for anti-steatosis drug screening based on a high-content analysis of Nile red staining (Fig. 8E) because our organoid model responded well to steatosis pathologic conditions and Nile red staining evidently indicated FA accumulation (Fig. 8B).

The top 4 compounds recovering the phenotype and lipid accumulation were identified in a library of autophagy, which could target hepatic steatosis (Fig. 8E).43

Notably, the anti-steatotic effects of the top 2 compounds were conferred by the inhibition of lipogenesis and the increase of lipid oxidation.44,45

In accordance with the phenotype, the expression of genes, such as hepatic fatty acid translocase CD36, the de novo lipogenesis related factors SREBP and PPAR-γ, the related enzyme FASN, and a lipid droplet protein PLIN2, was potently downregulated after treatment with the top hit compounds (Fig. 8F and Fig. S20C).

The expression of genes related to β-oxidation CPT1, SLC25A20, ETFB, and PPAR-α was upregulated after treatment with the compounds (Fig. 8F and Fig. S20C).

The triglyceride concentration was indeed decreased by the top hit compounds (Fig. 8G).

Overall, in our attempt to validate the system, the organoids preserved mature liver functionality with respect to detoxification and pathologic responses, and their expandability confer the potential for use as a toxicity prediction and drug-validation platform.

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

The development of physiologically and pathologically relevant hepatic models that preserve functional human liver characteristics over the long-term in vitro has remained a challenge.

Herein, we provide a method of generating expandable and functionally mature human PSC-derived hepatocyte-like liver organoids.

Our protocol is highly efficient and reproducible and takes a relatively short time (approximately 22 days) after starting differentiation.

The established organoids were scalable and showed i) self-renewal, ii) rapid proliferation and maturation, and iii) long-term storage and good viability after cryopreservation.

Furthermore, the organoids were functionally beneficial in i) protein and lipid metabolism, ii) active mitochondrial bioenergetics, iii) regenerative and inflammatory responses, iv) drug metabolism and detoxification, and v) the recapitulation of liver pathology over 20 passages.

Thus, these organoids may be a stable and robust in vitro hepatic model that can facilitate an understanding of liver development and regeneration, providing insights for metabolic studies and disease modeling, as well as toxicity assessment and drug screening for personalized medicine.

PARAGRAPH

In this study, we define for the first time a novel culture condition in which PSC-derived hepatic organoids have functions comparable to those of tissue-derived liver organoids.

PSC-derived organoids exhibit self-renewal while maintaining their mature hepatic characteristics over long-term culture in “HM”, which is a novel composition we newly define here, and “EM and DM” are the exactly same as reported by Clevers’ group.22

We excluded R-spondin and FGF10 in “HM”, which were included in EM, because they are dispensable to the growth of organoids and costly.

However, R-spondin, a Wnt agonist, and FGF10, which functions in the patterning of the primitive gut,46 may be the critical components for overcoming the differentiation barrier.

Since we could not find abundant expression of ALB and CYP3A4 without EM before the DM treatment, it may be essential to perform further hepatic differentiation by promoting the survival/proliferation of hepatoblasts/hepatocytes.

Compared with DM, the boost in proliferation by forskolin22 and bFGF47 for hepatic progenitors and by nicotinamide and ITS for hepatocytes48 and the boost in hepatic maturation by OSM49 may be the critical stimuli derived from “HM”.

Wnt and FGF signaling derived by cardiac mesoderm is essential for inducing ventral foregut endoderm and subsequently producing hepatic progenitors in liver development.47,49

Forskolin, a cAMP inducer, increases the expression of LGR5,22 a receptor for R-spondin and a liver stem cell marker that potentiates Wnt signaling.50

bFGF mediates specification of hepatic progenitors47 by substituting for cardiac mesodermal signals.51

Therefore, “HM” could simultaneously intensify the self-renewal and hepatic maturation potential of organoids, thereby providing useful conditions for long-term in vitro experimentation.

PARAGRAPH

To validate the feasibility of our organoids, we intensively analyzed their molecular foundations and functional competences.

First, we demonstrated the quantitative similarity of our organoids to human liver tissue using LiGEP.36

Given that hepatocytes, the major parenchymal cells, constitute approximately 80% of liver tissue, a similarity of 60.22% in the DM-cultured organoids would be a meaningful level achievable by an in vitro differentiation system.

hPSC-derived organoids have been reported to have a less mature phenotype in vitro;52–54 however, our model shows at least an advantage of rapid kinetics of the generation/differentiation of organoids, an absolute amount of albumin production, and potent mitochondrial respiration compared with those of adult liver tissue-derived organoids.

Second, a detailed transcriptome analysis revealed mature characteristics of the organoids, with enriched gene sets such as those for drug-metabolizing enzymes, mitochondrial and peroxisomal lipid metabolism, and coagulation cascades.

Importantly, the liver, which is a key metabolic organ, is highly reliant on energy-generating mitochondrial functions.55

OXPHOS was a top-enriched pathway in differentiated hepatic organoids compared with conventional 2D differentiated hepatocytes.

Indeed, the bioenergetic profile revealed that the respiration capacity and ATP production rate were apparently higher in the organoids than in the 2D culture.

An analysis of the metabolites and metabolism-related gene expression also revealed metabolic reprogramming of iPSCs from glycolysis to mitochondrial OXPHOS during organoid generation.

PARAGRAPH

Furthermore, other prominent pathways enriched in the organoids included gene sets involved in bile acid and lipid metabolism, which is also crucial in liver function.55

Gene expression related to bile acid synthesis and the expression levels of the bile acid receptor and transporter were enhanced in the organoids, and bile acid production and polarized epithelial cells with a bile canaliculi-like structure were strongly detected in differentiated organoids.

Gene expression related to lipid metabolism, including FA uptake and metabolism, triglyceride hydrolysis, β-oxidation, and cholesterol metabolism and secretion, was also clearly enhanced in the organoids.

Fatty acyl CoA was indeed distinctly increased in the organoids.

In addition, the organoids responded well to excess FA treatment and reflected steatosis phenotypes such as lipid droplet accumulation, increased triglycerides, and mitochondrial impairment.

PARAGRAPH

Notably, our organoids readily produced a disease model (such as hepatic steatosis) that comprised a relatively uniform size and homogenous phenotype.

Furthermore, genetic disease modeling using organoids derived from patient iPSCs or whole-genome-scale genetically engineered PSCs is comparatively simple because of the clonal properties of PSCs.56

Therefore, this robust and convenient organoid model may be applicable as a drug-screening system and, in this study, it provided reliable drug targets in a small-scale setting.

However, our current model has limitations when it comes to recapitulating further progression of severe liver damage because of the absence of the adipose tissue and gut, outside the liver, as well as of niche cells from within the liver, such as Kupffer cells, hepatic stellate cells, and sinusoidal endothelial cells, which are important for triggering inflammation and fibrosis.40

Indeed, the inflammatory responses were not induced in our simple steatosis model, which is in accordance with a report indicating that lipid accumulation is insufficient to induce inflammation in the liver,57 although inflammatory signaling presented a sufficient response under APAP, LPS or CCl4 treatment, and steatosis-induced organoids revealed impaired glucose metabolism.

Thus, a niche-enriched- and/or multi-organoid platform will help to recapitulate the actual inflammatory pathologies.

PARAGRAPH

Most importantly, upon chronic exposure to hepatotoxic drugs, the organoids in HM exhibited significantly higher sensitivity than the 2D differentiated monolayers of hepatocytes at clinically relevant concentrations.

In the case of trovafloxacin, which was withdrawn from the market due to severe hepatotoxicity, the TC50 in the organoids was 2.7 μM, which is below the human plasma Cmax concentration (4.1 μM), while the TC50 in 2D MHs was 141 μM.

Technically, the real-time monitoring of hepatotoxicity based on the high-content analysis of ROS, GSH, and nuclear structures, as well as cellular bioenergetics as determined by the mitochondrial OCR, could potentially predict the toxicological responses at concentrations close to the therapeutic exposure levels.

Thus, our method using iPSC-based patient-specific organoids would enable the high-throughput and early prediction of drug-induced liver injury (DILI) by parent drugs or their reactive metabolites with increased sensitivity.

However, for the application to further high-quality large-scale drug testing, DM conditions with high levels of activity of drug-metabolizing enzymes could provide a better platform, which may reflect more mature and accurate liver functionality.

In addition, the organoids may be applicable to prediction models for hepatocellular toxicity, cholestatic toxicity by hepatobiliary inhibiting drugs, and the mixed-type toxicity of DILI, because the organoids contain both hepatocytes and cholangiocytes with a polarized bile canaliculi-like structure.

Furthermore, modeling drug-induced steatosis55 as well as diet/metabolism-induced steatosis may be possible.

In addition, the mechanical compliance of 3D cultures may be associated with the superiority of the organoids because we previously found that soft niches close to that of native liver tissue enhanced the functionality of a 3D liver model.58

Functional improvements following epigenetic changes are a possible explanation, although further detailed mechanistic studies on the functional maturation of our organoids are needed.

PARAGRAPH

Recently, human hepatic organoids derived from PSCs were reported,56 and although the method of generation was different from ours, similar compositions of the 2 main types of cells (hepatocytes and cholangiocytes) were generated without other cellular complexity.

Those organoids mainly provided an application for the genetic disease model of bile duct formation with genome editing.

Our organoids are morphologically indistinguishable from and as functionally competent as adult tissue-derived liver organoids.

Here, we analyzed detailed properties of our organoids and demonstrated the potential of the organoids as a screening platform for toxicity prediction and drug evaluation.

Based on the final application and prior optimization, HM-cultured organoids and DM-cultured organoids could be used selectively, depending on the specific properties required.

Further studies are required to determine additional applications of complex organ-like structures with cellular complexity, and to determine the utility of in vivo transplantation for regenerative medicine.

SECTION

Financial support

PARAGRAPH

This work was supported by the KRIBB Initiative of the Korea Research Council of Fundamental Science and Technology; the National Research Foundation (NRF) grant funded by the Korean government (MSIT) (NRF-2019R1A2C2004992); the Korea Health Technology R&D Project through the KHIDI, funded by the Ministry of Health & Welfare (HI16C0312); and the Bio & Medical Technology Development Program of the NRF & funded by the Korean government (MSIT) (NRF-2018M3A9H3023077).

SECTION

Conflict of interest

PARAGRAPH

The authors declare no conflicts of interest that pertain to this work.

PARAGRAPH

Please refer to the accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.

SECTION

Authors’ contributions

PARAGRAPH

Study conception and design: Mun SJ, Ryu J, Son YS, Son M, Kim J, Jung C, Chung K, and Son MJ.

Acquisition of data: Mun SJ, Ryu J, Oh SJ, Kim D, Kim SJ, Yoo HJ, and Son MJ.

Analysis and interpretation of data: Mun SJ, Ryu J, Lee M, Oh SJ, Cho H, Kim D, Kim SJ, Yoo HJ, Lee H, Chung K, and Son MJ.

Drafting of manuscript: Lee H, Chung K, and Son MJ.

Critical revision: Mun SJ, Ryu J, Lee M, Oh SJ, Lee H, Chung K, and Son MJ