10.1016/j.jhep.2019.09.014

ABSTRACT

TITLE

Hepatocyte-derived extracellular vesicles promote endothelial inflammation and atherogenesis via microRNA-1

PARAGRAPH

Clinical evidence has indicated a close link between non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and cardiovascular disease (CVD).

However, the underlying mechanism remains to be elucidated.

This study aimed to explore a potential role of hepatocyte-derived extracellular vesicles (EVs) in endothelial inflammation and atherogenesis in the context of NAFLD.

PARAGRAPH

EVs were isolated, quantified and characterized from steatotic hepatocytes.

An endothelial cell-specific PCR array was used to screen the functional properties of EVs.

Profiling of global microRNA expression was conducted in EVs.

The expression level and biological function of microRNA-1 (miR-1) was determined by quantitative PCR, immunoblot and reporter gene assays, respectively.

The in vivo effect of miR-1 on atherogenesis was investigated in apolipoprotein E (ApoE)-deficient mice administered with a miR-1-specific inhibitor, antagomiR-1.

PARAGRAPH

Steatotic hepatocytes released more EVs, which had significantly altered miRNA expression profiles compared to the EVs released by control hepatocytes.

Endothelial cells co-cultured with steatotic hepatocytes, or treated with their EVs or miR-1, expressed significantly more proinflammatory molecules, as well as exhibiting increased NF-κB activity and reduced Kruppel-like factor 4 (KLF4) expression.

EV-induced endothelial inflammation was prevented by either downregulation or inhibition of miR-1.

While miR-1 treatment suppressed KLF4 expression and reporter gene activity, overexpression of KLF4 dramatically abolished the miR-1-induced endothelial inflammation.

Moreover, not only did the miR-1 inhibitor reduce endothelial inflammation in vitro, but it also attenuated atherogenesis in ApoE-deficient mice.

PARAGRAPH

Steatotic hepatocyte-derived EVs promote endothelial inflammation and facilitate atherogenesis by miR-1 delivery, KLF4 suppression and NF-κB activation.

The findings illustrate an important role of hepatocyte-derived EVs in distant communications between the liver and vasculature, suggesting a new mechanism underlying the link between NAFLD and CVD.

