10.1016/j.jhep.2019.09.014

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Hepatocyte-derived extracellular vesicles promote endothelial inflammation and atherogenesis via microRNA-1

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) has become a major public health concern worldwide.

The disease currently affects 20–35% of the general population in Western countries, and 10% of patients can progress from benign steatosis to more severe conditions, including steatohepatitis, cirrhosis, and liver failure.1,2

Moreover, multiple lines of evidence have revealed a strong association between NAFLD and several markers of subclinical atherosclerosis independent of traditional risk factors.3–5

Thus, not only is the adverse effect of NAFLD confined to the progression of deteriorating liver function, but it also confers an independent risk for the development of atherosclerosis and other related cardiovascular diseases (CVDs).

PARAGRAPH

Atherosclerosis is regarded as a chronic inflammatory metabolic disease caused by aberrant accumulation of lipids and infiltration of inflammatory cells at the vascular endothelium.6

It is believed that the first step in the initiation of atherosclerosis is endothelial injury and dysfunction.6,7

Both clinical evidence and experimental data have demonstrated a close link between NAFLD, endothelium dysfunction and CVD,4,5,8 whereas the underlying mechanism remains to be elucidated.

PARAGRAPH

The link between NAFLD and CVD indicates the importance of intercellular communication in the pathogenic process of the diseases.

It is now well recognized that cells communicate not only via direct contact and soluble factors, but also by membrane-derived nanometer-sized vesicles, namely, extracellular vesicles (EVs).9,10

EVs carry numerous donor cell-derived molecules, including proteins, lipids and nucleic acids.

By transferring these bioactive contents into target cells, EVs play essential roles in intercellular communications.9,11

The EVs are released under either physiologic or pathologic conditions, including liver diseases, and exert a wide range of effects on target cells.9,12

Among the various molecular cargos, miRNAs are regarded as essential to the function of EVs.9,13

PARAGRAPH

The highly conserved, non-coding small RNAs consist of 19–26 nucleotides and are key regulators of gene expression in a wide range of organisms.14

They usually contain a 6- to 8-nucleotide seed sequence, corresponding to complementary sequences in the 3′-untranslated region (3′-UTR) of target mRNAs.14

Thus, miRNAs can suppress protein expression of targeted mRNAs through either translational arrest or mRNA degradation.

Serving as an important cargo of EVs, miRNAs have recently emerged as key regulators involved in the pathogenesis of various diseases, including NAFLD and CVD.15–17

In the present study, we provide the first evidence that EVs released from steatotic hepatocytes are potent inducers of endothelial inflammation.

Furthermore, we identified microRNA-1 (miR-1) as a key molecule mediating the pro-inflammatory effect of EVs via downregulation of Kruppel-like factor 4 (KLF4) and activation of the NF-κB pathway in endothelial cells.

Moreover, inhibiting miR-1 with a specific antagomiR profoundly attenuated atherogenesis in apolipoprotein E (ApoE)-deficient mice.

Thus, our findings uncover an important role for hepatocyte-derived EVs in endothelial inflammation and suggest a novel pathogenic mechanism underlying the development of CVD associated with NAFLD.

SECTION

Materials and methods

SECTION

Cell culture, transfection, and treatments

PARAGRAPH

All cell lines were maintained at 37 °C with 5% CO2 in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS.

Primary murine hepatocytes were isolated using a collagenase perfusion method and purified by Percoll gradient centrifugation as described previously.18

Viable hepatocytes were determined by trypan blue and cultured for the experiments.

Huh7 hepatocyte line was purchased from JCRB (Japan), and HEK293 and THP-1 cell lines from ATCC (USA).

Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) were isolated from donated umbilical cords as previously described.19

HUVECs used in the study were from passages 2–6 and were cultured on collagenase-coated dishes with endothelium cell basal medium (ScienCell Research Laboratories, San Diego, USA) containing growth factors, 10% FBS, streptomycin (100 IU/ml), penicillin (100 IU/ml) and Amphotericin B (10 μg/L).

FuGENE® HD (Roche) and Lipo 3000 reagents (Gibco) were used for transfections.

Palmitic acid (PA) was dissolved in 0.1 M NaOH by heating at 90 °C for 10 min, and then a stock solution was prepared containing 5 mM free fatty acid (FFA) coupled with 5% (w/v) fatty acid-free BSA (Sigma, St. Louis, USA).

For treatment of cells, the stock FFA solution was added into serum-free medium at the indicated concentrations for the desired time period.

SECTION

Isolation and characterization of hepatocyte-derived extracellular vesicles

PARAGRAPH

EVs were isolated from cell culture media of primary murine hepatocytes or Huh7 cells by differential centrifugation as previously described.20

Briefly, hepatocytes were grown to 90% confluence in 6 × 100 mm tissue-culture dishes and treated with 200 µM PA or vehicles alone in serum-free medium (10 ml/dish) for 18 h.

After treating and removing cells and other debris by centrifugation, the media underwent differential centrifugation at 2,000×g and 10,000 × g, respectively, for 30 min.

The supernatant was then filtered (0.22 μm filter) and re-centrifuged at 120,000×g for 2 h at 4 °C.

The pellets containing EVs were re-suspended in PBS and centrifuged at 120,000×g for 2 h again.

Each resultant pellet was finally re-suspended in PBS buffer for use or stored at 4 °C for less than 3 days for further experiments.

The size and number of EVs were determined by nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA) with Nanosight NS 300 (Malvern Panalytical, UK).

The EVs were identified by transmission electronic microscope analysis at Fudan University Electron Microscopy Center.

Briefly, EVs were fixed in 1.5 M sodium cacodylate buffer (pH 7.4), absorbed onto formvar-coated copper grids (Science Services, München), and examined by electronic microscope (Tecnai G2 Spirit, FEI Corp., USA).

Images were taken with an AMT digital camera for data acquisition.

SECTION

Western blot analysis

PARAGRAPH

Western blot analysis was performed according to the standard protocol as previously described.21

The details of antibodies used in this study are shown in the Supplementary CTAT Table.

SECTION

RNA extraction, small RNA-sequencing and quantitative real-time PCR

PARAGRAPH

Mouse primary hepatocytes were isolated from diet-induced obese (DIO) or control mice, and hepatocyte-derived EVs were isolated from conditioned medium.

Total RNAs in the EVs were extracted using the SeraMir exosome RNA kit (SBI, Mountain View, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions.

RNA-seq was conducted on an Illumina HiSeq 2500 at Guangzhou RiboBio (Guangzhou, China).

Briefly, RNAs were ligated with 3′RNA adapter, followed by 5′adapter ligation.

Subsequently, the adapter-ligated RNAs were subjected to reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR) and amplified with a low-cycle.

Then the PCR products were size selected by PAGE gel according to instructions of NEBNext® Multiplex Small RNA Library Prep Set for Illumina® (Illumina, USA).

The purified library products were evaluated using the Agilent 2200 TapeStation and diluted to 10 pM for cluster generation in situ on the HiSeq2500 single-end flow cell followed by sequencing (1 × 50 bp) on HiSeq 2500.

The quality of the sequencing data was analyzed by the bioinformatics team associated with the sequencing core.

Quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) was performed with an Applied Biosystems 7500 using SYBR® Premix EX Taq™ (Takara, Tokyo, Japan).

In brief, the RNA was reverse transcribed to cDNA using small RNA assays and miRNA-specific primers (RiboBio), according to the manufacturer's instructions.

U6 small RNA and cel-miR-39 were used as an internal and external standard, respectively.

Each sample was analyzed in triplicate in an RT-PCR assay, and the mean threshold cycle (Ct) value of the triplicates was used in the final data analysis.

The qPCR results were first normalized to the Ct value of U6 or cel-miR-39, referred to as ΔCt.

The relative miRNA expression levels were calculated using the 2 -ΔΔCt method.

SECTION

EV internalization assay

PARAGRAPH

Hepatocyte-derived EVs were fluorescently labeled with the cell membrane marker, PKH26 (Sigma, USA), prior to incubation with HUVECs.

After 12 h incubation, HUVECs were washed vigorously, fixed by 4% paraformaldehyde and counterstained with DAPI.

Control cells were treated with PBS vehicle alone.

Microscopic images were analyzed using Image J.

SECTION

Co-culture experiments

PARAGRAPH

Co-culture experiments were conducted in 6-well Transwell® plates with 0.4 µm pore-sized filters (Corning Costar, USA).

Huh7 cells were seeded in each transwell insert with HUVECs seeded at the bottom chamber.

Both hepatocytes and HUVECs were washed with PBS before starting the co-culture experiments.

SECTION

Human endothelial cell biology PCR array

PARAGRAPH

HUVECs were treated for 24 h with the EVs isolated from PA-treated Huh7 hepatocytes or control Huh7 cells; these EVs were termed PAEV or CtlEV, respectively.

Total RNA was then extracted from the treated endothelial cells using an RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen; Carlsbad, USA) with DNase digestion.

One microgram of total RNA was reverse transcribed using a QuantiTect reverse transcription kit (Qiagen).

The cDNA products were analyzed using a Human Endothelial Cell Biology RT2 Profiler™ PCR array (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer's instructions.

The data were further validated by qPCR with the QuantiTect SYBR green PCR kit (Qiagen) and analyzed through the vendor's web-based module (ΔΔCq method) as previously described.18

SECTION

Adhesion assay

PARAGRAPH

Adherence of monocytes to endothelial cells was analyzed as described previously.19

In brief, THP-1 cells were labeled with a fluorescent probe, BCECF-AM (APExBIO, Huston, USA).

After washing, the labeled monocytes (1 × 104 cells/well) were added to the monolayers of HUVECs treated with or without tumor necrosis factor-α (TNFα) (1 ng/ml) for 6 h. Nonadherent cells were removed by rinsing the plates 3 times, and the number of adherent cells counted under a fluorescence microscope.

SECTION

Transfection of the miR-1 inhibitor or mimic

PARAGRAPH

For the functional analysis of miR-1, a commercially available miR-1 inhibitor or mimic and a negative control inhibitor or mimic (mirVana™; Invitrogen, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) were used.

The transfection was conducted using the complexes of Lipofectamine 3000 (Invitrogen) and miR-1 inhibitor/mimic (50 nM) or negative controls according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

SECTION

Adenovirus infection and siRNA knockdown of KLF4

PARAGRAPH

For overexpressing KLF4, HUVECs were infected with control or KLF4-expressing adenovirus at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 10 (Ad-GFP and Ad-KLF4, respectively; purchased from Research-Bio, Shanghai, China).

For loss-of-function studies, HUVECs were transfected with KLF4-specific siRNA (the targeting sequence is: CCA GAG GAG CCC AAG CCA ATT) or scrambled control oligonucleotides (50 nM; purchased from GenePharma, Shanghai, China) using Lipofectamine 3000 according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

SECTION

Luciferase reporter gene assays

PARAGRAPH

The NF-κB reporter gene assay was conducted by co-transfection of Ig-κB-luciferase reporter gene plasmids (pTK81-IgK, 200 ng per transfection) with a Renilla luciferase vector (pRL, 20 ng per transfection) as described previously.22

For assessing the activity of miR-1 on KLF4 gene expression, a commercially available vector of pMIR-REPORT (Promega, Madison, USA) was re-constructed with a fragment of the 3′-UTR of KLF4 mRNA containing the putative miR-1 binding sequence as reported previously.23

Luciferase activity assays were performed using a dual-luciferase reporter assay system (Promega) and normalized relative to Renilla luciferase activity as described previously.22

Each experiment was performed in triplicate and repeated independently for at least 3 times.

SECTION

Animal experiments

PARAGRAPH

Animal studies were approved by the Animal Use and Care Committee of Fudan University and were in conformity with the US Public Health Service Policy on Humane Care and Use of Laboratory Animals.

All mice were housed in a temperature-controlled pathogen-free environment on a 12 h light/dark cycle, had ad libitum access to food and water.

For isolation of primary hepatocytes, C57/BL6J mice (male, aged 6–8 weeks) were randomly assigned to 2 groups (6/group), fed ad libitum with regular chow and a high-fat diet (HFD, containing 60 kcal% fat, 20% protein and 20% carbohydrate; Research Diets, #D12492, New Jersey), respectively, for 12 weeks.

The details of diet compositions are shown in Table S1.

ApoE−/− mice (male, aged 6–8 weeks) were purchased from Vital River Laboratory Animal Technology (Beijing, China) and fed with HFD for 10 weeks.

Four weeks after HFD feeding, mice were injected intravenously with antagomiRs (RiboBio, Guangzhou, China) via tail veins at a dose of 10 mg/kg of body weight in 0.2 ml saline once every week for 6 weeks.

A scramble antagomiR (anta-Ctl) with the sequence 5′-CAGUACUUUUGUGUAGUACAAA-3′ was used as a control.

The miR-1 antagomiR (antagomiR-1) sequence was 5′-AUACAUACUUCUUUACAUUCCA-3′.

SECTION

Atherosclerosis analysis

PARAGRAPH

The experimental mice were perfused by cardiac puncture with 4% (w/v) paraformaldehyde to wash out blood from the heart and all vessels after euthanasia.

After removing the surrounding fat and connective tissues, the entire aorta was examined under stereomicroscope.

For en face analysis, the whole aorta was excised from the aortic arch to the common iliac artery and stained with Oil red O. To analyze the atherosclerotic lesions, cross-sections of the aortic root were stained with H&E, Oil red O and Masson’s reagent, respectively.

For immunohistochemistry assays, the frozen slides were blocked with 5% goat serum albumin and probed with the primary antibodies overnight at 4 °C.

The reactivity of the antibodies in the slides was detected using a streptavidin-peroxidase histostain-SP kit (ZsBio, Beijing, China).

The peroxidase activity was visualized with diaminobenzidine, followed by hematoxylin staining to counterstain the nuclei.

Images of each section were obtained with a bright-field microscope (Leica, DM6000B; Leica Microsystems) connected to a Leica CCD camera (DFC365FX) and quantified using IMAGEPRO PLUS software.

SECTION

Statistical analysis

PARAGRAPH

All data were analyzed with SPSS 19.0.

Comparisons between 2 groups were conducted using 2-tailed Student's t test or Mann-Whitney U test, and ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc tests were performed for statistical significance among multiple groups.

The level of statistical significance was set at p < 0.01.

SECTION

Results

SECTION

Characterization of EVs derived from steatotic hepatocytes

PARAGRAPH

In an attempt to identify EVs released from hepatocytes under steatotic conditions, we applied a common cellular model of hepatosteatosis, in which hepatocytes were chronically exposed to the saturated FFA, PA.

In line with our previous report,18 treatment of Huh7 hepatocytes with PA resulted in a significant accumulation of lipids in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. S1A-1B).

Because PA can also cause apoptosis in hepatocytes under certain conditions,21 we sought to establish treatment conditions prior to EV collection that minimized the presence of apoptotic bodies.

We found that exposing Huh7 hepatocytes to 0.2 mM PA for 18 h stimulated significant intracellular lipid accumulation but did not induce evident cell death (Fig. S1C).

Following this treatment, we collected EVs from cell culture media by differential ultracentrifugation and characterized them by NTA.

In agreement with previous reports,24 PA treatment resulted in a nearly 10-fold increase in EV release from Huh7 hepatocytes, compared to cells treated with vehicle alone (Fig. 1A-1B).

NTA revealed that the size distribution of EVs was 30–200 nm in diameter (Fig. 1A).

PA treatment slightly increased the mean size of the EVs in comparison with the controls (131 nm vs. 121 nm, Fig. 1A, 1C).

The characteristic morphologies of EVs were further determined by transmission electron microscopy examination as shown in Fig. 1D.

The EVs were enriched in the characteristic markers of exosome, including Tsg101, CD63 and CD81, without expression of the proteins associated with other cellular organelles, such as early endosomes (EEA-1) and endoplasmic reticulum (Grp78) (Fig. 1E), suggesting that the majority of EVs that we collected were likely exosomes derived from hepatocytes.

SECTION

Steatotic hepatocyte-derived EVs induce endothelial cell inflammatory injury

PARAGRAPH

To investigate the role of EVs in the interaction of hepatocytes with vascular endothelial cells, we firstly examined whether hepatocyte-derived EVs can be taken in by endothelial cells.

We applied a fluorescent dye, PKH26, to label the EVs derived from PA-treated (PAEV) or control-treated (CtlEV) Huh7 hepatocytes.

As shown in Fig. 2A, the red fluorescence clearly appeared within HUVECs following treatment with PKH26-labeled EVs for 12 h, and the intracellular fluorescence was further increased at 24 h after treatment, revealing that endothelial cells can efficiently assimilate hepatocyte-derived EVs.

Moreover, the density of intracellular fluorescence was significantly higher in the PAEV-treated HUVECs than CtlEV-treated cells (Fig. 2A), suggesting that EVs derived from steatotic hepatocytes could be preferentially delivered to endothelial cells.

PARAGRAPH

Having shown the ability of endothelial cells to take in hepatocyte-derived EVs, we then assessed the effect of EVs on the recipient endothelial cells.

To this end, HUVECs were treated for 24 h with PAEV or CtlEV and analyzed using a Human Endothelial Cell Biology Profiler PCR array, which contains 84 key genes relevant to angiogenesis, permeability, inflammation and other endothelial functions.

By comparison between the PAEV-treated and CtlEV-treated groups, we found that of the 84 genes, 33 were differentially expressed (Table S2).

Among them, the top 10 upregulated genes (≥2-fold) by PAEV were mostly related to endothelial inflammation, including E-selectin (SELE), intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM1), vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 (VCAM1), interleukin-1β (IL1B) and matrix metalloproteinase 1 (MMP1) (Fig. 2B).

The PAEV treatment-induced upregulation of these proinflammatory molecules was further validated by qPCR analysis as shown in Fig. 2C. Because NF-κB is regarded as a master controller of inflammatory gene expression, we then examined the effect of hepatocyte-derived EVs on the NF-κB pathway.

Remarkably, treatment of HUVECs with PAEV resulted in significant increases in p65 phosphorylation and IκB degradation, compared to the CtlEV-treated cells (Fig. 2D), indicating NF-κB pathway activation.

To verify the effect of hepatocyte-derived EVs on NF-κB activation, we conducted a NF-κB-specific reporter gene assay.

Serving as a positive control, TNFα treatment resulted in a > 20-fold increase in reporter activity (Fig. 2E), which is consistent with our previous report.23

Notably, treatment with PAEV resulted in a significant increase in reporter gene activity under both control- and TNFα-stimulated conditions in comparison with CtlEV (Fig. 2E), further indicating that the NF-κB pathway was activated by the steatotic hepatocyte-derived EVs.

PARAGRAPH

To further elucidate the effect of steatotic hepatocyte-derived EVs on endothelial cells, we isolated primary hepatocytes from a well-established animal model of NAFLD, i.e. DIO mice.

Consistent with our previous report,18 hepatocytes isolated from DIO mice exhibited evident accumulation of lipid droplets and a significant increase in intracellular triglycerides, in comparison with cells isolated from control mice fed with a normal chow diet (Fig. S2).

We co-cultured these primary hepatocytes with murine aortic endothelial cells.

In keeping with the above findings in PA-treated Huh7 cells, co-culture with the fatty liver-derived hepatocytes resulted in a significant increase in Sele, Icam1 and Vcam1 expression (Fig. 2F) and NF-κB activation (Fig. 2G) in endothelial cells, compared with cells co-cultured with normal hepatocytes.

Remarkably, pre-treating hepatocytes with GW4869, a neutral sphingomyelinase inhibitor that effectively blocks EV release,25 almost completely abolished the effect of co-culture with fatty liver-derived hepatocytes on endothelial cells (Fig. 2F-G).

Collectively, the data suggest steatotic hepatocytes potently promote endothelial inflammation through the release of EVs.

SECTION

The expression profile of EV miRNA is altered by steatotic hepatocytes with an upregulation of miR-1

PARAGRAPH

To identify the components responsible for the pro-inflammatory effect of EVs, we assessed the expression profiles of miRNA in the EVs derived from primary hepatocytes isolated from DIO (DIOEV) and normal control mice (NCEV) by Illumina miRNA deep-sequencing.

A wide range of changes in EV miRNA expression were observed between the NCEV and DIOEV groups.

Among the differentially expressed miRNAs, the top 20 miRNAs with a pronounced significant difference (fold change > 2) between NCEV and DIOEV are illustrated in a heat map shown in Fig. 3A (detailed in Table S3).

Of note, the cluster of miR-1, including miR-1a-3p and miR-1b-5p, was markedly upregulated with the most significance in DIOEV, compared to NCEV.

The increased miR-1 expression in steatotic hepatocyte-derived EVs was confirmed by qPCR analysis (Fig. 3B).

Interestingly, miR-1 expression was also elevated in total liver tissues and primary hepatocytes isolated from DIO mice, compared to control mice (Fig. 3C).

However, the extent of miR-1 upregulation in DIOEV was higher than that in liver tissues and hepatocytes (Fig. 3B-3C), suggesting a selective enrichment of miR-1 in the EVs derived from steatotic hepatocytes.

According to the database “miRBase”, murine miR-1 corresponds to miR-1-3p, miR-206 and miR-1-5p in humans.

Like the expression profile of murine miR-1, the levels of all 3 members of human miR-1 were significantly elevated in PAEV compared to CtlEV (Fig. 3D).

Together, these data demonstrate that the miRNA expression profile in EVs was altered by steatotic hepatocytes with a significant upregulation of miR-1 expression.

SECTION

miR-1 promotes endothelial inflammation

PARAGRAPH

Given the pro-inflammatory effect of steatotic hepatocyte-derived EVs and significant upregulation of miR-1 in EVs, we sought to test whether miR-1 mimics EV-induced endothelial inflammation.

To this end, HUVECs were transfected with miR-1 or miR-206 using a lentiviral transfection method.

A > 90% transfection efficacy was achieved and a significant upregulation of miR-1 or miR-206 detected following the transfection (Fig. S3).

Remarkably, overexpression of miR-1 or miR-206 resulted in a significant increase in both mRNA and protein levels of E-selectin, ICAM1 and VCAM1 in HUVECs following TNFα stimulation (Fig. 4A-4D).

Correspondingly, TNFα-induced NF-κB activation and adhesion of monocytes on endothelial cells was also significantly increased by overexpression of miR-1 or miR-206 (Fig. 4C-4E), indicating a potent pro-inflammatory effect of miR-1.

We did not find any miR-1 binding sites for the 3 adhesion molecules within the mRNA sequences by miRNA target prediction analysis.

However, among the predicted targets, the zinc finger protein KLF4 was brought to our attention.

A miR-1 binding site within the 3′ untranslated region (3′ UTR) of KLF4 was identified based on bioinformatic analysis (Fig. 4F), which is consistent with a previous report.23

In fact, miR-1 has been shown to directly bind to and suppress KLF4 expression in smooth muscle cells.23

In line with this, KLF4 expression was significantly downregulated by overexpression of either miR-1 or miR-206 in HUVECs (Fig. 4G).

Moreover, enforced overexpression of KLF4 dramatically abolished miR-1-induced VCAM1 expression, whereas knockdown of KLF4 expression by its specific siRNA was able to mimic and potentiate the effect of miR-1 (Fig. 4H).

Collectively, these data suggest that KLF4 is likely a functional target of miR-1.

To determine whether KLF4 is indeed a direct target of miR-1, we conducted KLF4 reporter gene assays.

Strongly substantiating a direct effect of miR-1 on KLF4, co-transfection of miR-1-mimics with the KLF4 3′-UTR reporter resulted in a significant reduction of luciferase activity in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. 4I).

SECTION

Hepatocyte-derived EVs promote endothelial inflammation via miR-1

PARAGRAPH

Having demonstrated the pro-inflammatory effect of miR-1, we hypothesized that EV-derived miR-1 mediates hepatocyte-induced endothelial inflammation under steatotic conditions.

To verify this hypothesis, we first examined whether miRNAs contained in hepatocyte-derived EVs are effectively delivered to endothelial cells.

To this end, a fluorescent Cy3-labeled miR-1 mimic was overexpressed in Huh7 cells that were then co-cultured with HUVECs.

After 24 h co-culture, the fluorescent dye was evidently accumulated within HUVECs (Fig. 5A).

Quantitative analysis of intracellular miR-1 expression showed that while the endogenous miR-1 expression was barely detected in endothelial cells, it was dramatically elevated in HUVECs co-cultured with either control or miR-1 transfected Huh7 hepatocytes (Fig. 5B).

Remarkably, by blocking EV release from the hepatocytes, GW4869 virtually abolished the increased miR-1 in HUVECs (Fig. 5B), indicating hepatocytes can deliver miR-1 into endothelial cells through the release of EVs.

In addition, exposure of HUVECs to PAEV resulted in a similar increased level of miR-1 expression, compared to the CtlEV treatment (Fig. 5C).

Of note, treatment of HUVECs with the anti-miR-1 inhibitor significantly attenuated PAEV-induced NF-κB activation (Fig. 5D).

Furthermore, the PAEV-induced suppression of KLF4 was reversed by the inhibition of miR-1 (Fig. 5D).

Taken together, these data illustrate that miR-1 is instrumental in mediating the pro-inflammatory effect of steatotic hepatocyte-derived EVs on endothelial cells.

SECTION

Inhibition of miR-1 attenuated atherogenesis in ApoE−/− mice

PARAGRAPH

Because endothelial inflammation plays a critical role in the development of atherosclerosis, we aimed to investigate the pro-inflammatory effect of miR-1 in vivo.

To this end, we employed ApoE−/− mice fed with HFD, a well-established animal model of atherosclerosis accompanied with fatty liver, and treated the mice with antagomiR-1 that specifically blocks miR-1 function.

Consistent with the above observations in vitro, the inflammatory phenotypes, including suppressed expression of Klf4, activation of NF-κB and upregulation of Vcam1, were significantly attenuated in mouse aortic tissues following antagomiR-1 treatment (Fig. 6A), which confirmed the efficacy of antagomiR-1 in the experimental animals.

There were no significant changes in general metabolic characteristics, including body weight, adiposity and levels of blood glucose, triglycerides and cholesterol, between the antagomiR-1-treated group and the control group that was administered a scrambled antagomiR (see Fig. S4).

Notably, both the number and size of atherosclerotic plaques in the aortic arch, thoracic aorta region and whole aorta were significantly decreased by antagomiR-1 treatment, compared with control group (Fig. 6B).

Histological analysis of cross-sections by HE staining and Oil red O staining on the proximal aorta revealed significantly less lesion areas in the antagomiR-1-treated mice than that in the controls (Fig. 6C).

Furthermore, plaque composition analysis was determined by quantification of SMA, collagen content and Icam1 expression.

As shown in Fig. 6D, SMA levels were significantly decreased by antagomiR-1 treatment compared with control treatment, indicating an ability of antagomiR-1 to suppress vascular smooth muscle cell growth within the plaques and attenuate atherosclerotic lesions.

In contrast, the collagen content was increased, suggesting that antagomiR-1 treatment led to more stable plaques (Fig. 6E).

We also investigated Icam1 expression as a marker of endothelial inflammation, and found that Icam1 was significantly decreased by antagomiR-1 treatment (Fig. 6F).

Taken together, these results reveal that inhibition of miR-1 profoundly ameliorated the formation and progression of atherosclerotic plaques in ApoE−/− mice.

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

In the current study, we provide both experimental evidence and mechanistic data demonstrating that steatotic hepatocytes are capable of promoting endothelial inflammation through EV release.

The findings provide an insight into an important role for EVs in the interaction between the liver and the vasculature, suggesting a mechanistic link between NAFLD and atherosclerotic CVD.

PARAGRAPH

Following intensive investigations in recent years, EVs have emerged as an important mediator of intercellular and inter-organ communications, playing critical roles in a wide range of pathophysiological processes.10,26

EVs can be released into extracellular fluid and the circulation by various types of cells, such as macrophages, hepatocytes, adipocytes and many others.9,11

The number and overall composition of EVs released by donor cells are often altered in response to various stresses or pathological stimuli.10,26

For instance, hepatocytes under lipotoxic stress have been shown to dramatically increase the release of EVs.24,27–29

In line with previous reports,24,29 we found that the release of EVs from steatotic hepatocytes, induced by PA treatment or isolated from DIO mice, is increased by about 10-fold compared to their respective control cells.

Moreover, through high-throughput sequencing of small RNAs, we found that over 500 miRNAs present within EVs are differentially expressed between normal and steatotic hepatocytes, suggesting a pathological role for EVs in hepatocytes.

Indeed, it has been reported that hepatocyte-derived EVs can promote inflammation and fibrosis in the liver by activating local macrophages in a paracrine manner, promoting the progression of NAFLD towards NASH.24,27–29

We have demonstrated herein that the EVs released by hepatocytes act as a signal, mediating distant communication between the liver and vascular endothelium under NAFLD conditions.

This notion is supported by the following findings.

Firstly, treatment of HUVECs with hepatocyte-derived EVs labeled with PKH26 resulted in marked accumulation of red fluorescence within cells in a time-dependent fashion (Fig. 2A), indicating that endothelial cells can efficiently take up hepatocyte-derived EVs.

Moreover, the EVs derived from steatotic hepatocytes appear to be preferentially taken up by endothelial cells.

Secondly, exposure of endothelial cells to steatotic hepatocyte-derived EVs led to a significant increase in the expression of pro-inflammatory molecules, including E-selectin, VCAM1, ICAM1, IL1β and MMP1, and activation of the NF-κB pathway (Fig. 2B-2E).

Thirdly, this pro-inflammatory effect of steatotic hepatocyte-derived EVs can be mimicked by co-culture of endothelial cells with steatotic hepatocytes (Fig. 2F-2G).

Finally, once EV release was blocked by GW4869 in the co-culture system, the pro-inflammatory effect was profoundly suppressed (Fig. 2F-2G).

Taken together, these findings indicate that the steatotic hepatocytes are primed to deliver pro-inflammatory signals into endothelial cells via EV release.

PARAGRAPH

Among the various active components within EVs, miRNAs have gained particular attention.

In fact, EVs have recently emerged as a principal carrier for extracellular miRNAs that signal in intercellular communications.13

Upon profiling hepatocyte-derived EV miRNAs, we found that a set of miRNAs was significantly altered by steatotic hepatocytes, in comparison with control cells.

Specifically, a significant increase in miR-1 expression was identified in the steatotic hepatocyte-derived EVs.

Interestingly, although miR-1 expression was also increased in the total liver tissues and primary hepatocytes derived from DIO mice, the extent of miR-1 upregulation in EVs was more evident (Fig. 3B-3C), suggesting a selective increase of miR-1 expression by EVs derived from steatotic hepatocytes.

Originally described as a muscle-specific miRNA, miR-1 is highly expressed in muscle cells, including smooth muscle, skeletal muscle and cardiac muscle, and plays a critical regulatory role in muscle cell differentiation and growth.23,30

An elevated circulating level of miR-1 was found to associate with myocardial steatosis and suggested to be a hallmark of diabetic cardiomyopathy.31

In addition, miR-1 has been reported to contribute to glucose-mediated apoptosis in cardiomyocytes by downregulating LXRα expression.32

Furthermore, miR-1 expression has recently been found in the vascular endothelium within malignant tumors, suggesting a potential role of miR-1 in tumor angiogenesis.33,34

However, the physiologic function of miR-1 in endothelial cells, especially that relevant to cardiometabolic disease, has not yet been explored.

In the present study, we found that hepatocyte-derived EVs contained a relatively high expression level of miR-1 family mRNAs, including miR-1-3p, miR-1-5p and miR-206.

Of note, miR-1 expression in EVs derived from steatotic hepatocytes was significantly higher than that from control hepatocytes (Fig. 3A-3D).

Interestingly, while the endogenous level of miR-1 expression was nearly undetectable in endothelial cells under basal normal conditions (Fig. 5B), it was dramatically increased in the cells either treated with steatotic hepatocyte-derived EVs (Fig. 5C) or co-cultured with hepatocytes (Fig. 5B).

By blocking EV release from the hepatocytes, GW4869 almost completely abolished endothelial expression of miR-1 (Fig. 5B), corroborating the ability of endothelial cells to uptake the miR-1 extracted from steatotic hepatocyte-derived EVs.

Remarkably, overexpression of miR-1 in endothelial cells mimicked the pro-inflammatory effect of EVs, as reflected by a significant increase in TNFα-stimulated E-selectin, VCAM1 and ICAM1 expression, monocyte adhesion and NF-κB activation (Fig. 4A-4E).

By contrast, the pro-inflammatory effect was profoundly blocked by the miR-1-specific inhibitor (Fig. 5D).

Collectively, these data uncover an important role of miR-1 in mediating the pro-inflammatory effect of steatotic hepatocyte-derived EVs in vascular endothelial cells.

PARAGRAPH

To further investigate the role of miR-1 in endothelial inflammation and its significance in cardiometabolic disease, we employed a well-established animal model of atherosclerosis accompanied by fatty liver, i.e., ApoE−/− mice fed with HFD.

As expected, numerous atherosclerotic plaques were formed in the aortic arch, thoracic aorta region and whole aorta in ApoE−/− mice after 10-weeks feeding with HFD (Fig. 6B).

Remarkably, treatment with antagomiR-1 that specifically blocks miR-1 function (Fig. 6A) resulted in a significant reduction in both the number and size of the atherosclerotic plaques throughout the whole aorta, compared with the control treatment (Fig. 6B).

Furthermore, histological analysis of cross-sections of the proximal aorta revealed that the antagomiR-1-treated mice developed significantly less atherosclerotic lesion areas than the control group (Fig. 6B-6C), along with a reduced level of SMA (Fig. 6D), increased content of collagen fibers (Fig. 6E), and less Vcam1 positive plagues (Fig. 6F).

These data illustrate that the antagomiR-1-induced inhibition of miR-1 suppressed vascular smooth muscle cell growth, stabilized plaques and reduced endothelial inflammation, leading to marked amelioration of atherosclerotic plaque formation and progression in ApoE−/− mice.

The findings thus delineate an important role of miR-1 in the development of atherosclerosis in ApoE−/− mice.

Given the fact that steatotic hepatocyte-derived EVs induced endothelial inflammation in vitro via their cargo of miR-1, we speculate a similar mechanism may promote atherogenesis in NAFLD.

However, due to the experimental limitations, this rational has not been directly clarified in this study.

It is also worth noting that although the anti-atherogenic effect of antagomiR-1 appears chiefly attributable to the inhibitory effect on endothelial inflammation, we cannot exclude other possible actions independent of endothelial cells.

PARAGRAPH

The major biological function of miRNAs is post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression, and they are thus involved in many fundamental cellular processes.14

KLF4 belongs to a subfamily of the zinc finger class of transcriptional regulators and has been identified as an important regulator of vascular homeostasis.35,36

By using endothelial-specific gain-of-function and loss-of-function approaches in vivo, a recent study has identified a key protective role of KLF4 against endothelial inflammation and atherothrombosis.35

According to bioinformatic analysis, a miR-1 binding site exists in the 3′UTR of KLF4.

Indeed, miR-1 has been shown to directly bind to and suppress KLF4 expression in smooth muscle cells.23

In keeping with this finding, we found that overexpression of miR-1 significantly downregulated KLF4 expression in endothelial cells (Fig. 4G).

Moreover, enforced overexpression of KLF4 profoundly blocked the pro-inflammatory effect of miR-1, whereas knockdown of KLF4 expression potentiated the effect (Fig. 4H), indicating that KLF4 is likely a functional target of miR-1.

Likewise, the endothelial cells treated with steatotic hepatocyte-derived EVs resulted in a similar suppression of KLF4 (Fig. 5D).

Moreover, the EV-reduced KLF4 expression was significantly abolished by the anti-miR-1 inhibitor (Fig. 5D), suggesting that the pro-inflammatory effect of miR-1 is mediated through KLF4 suppression.

The KLF4 reporter gene assays reveal that co-transfection of miR-1-mimics with the KLF4 3′-UTR reporter resulted in a dose-dependent suppression of luciferase activity (Fig. 4I), further indicating that KLF4 is a direct target of miR-1.

KLF4 is known to interact with p300, a key coactivator required for optimal transcriptional activity of many factors, including NF-κB and its target genes such as VCAM1 and tissue factor.35,37

In accordance with this, we found that both steatotic hepatocyte-derived EVs and miR-1 treatment resulted in significantly reduced KLF4 expression, accompanying NF-κB activation and elevated adhesion molecule expression in endothelial cells.

Therefore, it is interesting to postulate a signaling model, i.e., the miR-1-KLF4-NF-κB pathway, by which steatotic hepatocyte-derived EVs promote endothelial inflammation and atherogenesis.

PARAGRAPH

In conclusion, our study provides compelling evidence implicating hepatocyte-derived EVs as key mediators of distant communications between the liver and vasculature, especially in the context of NAFLD, shedding light on a mechanism underlying the development of cardiometabolic disease.

SECTION

Abbreviations

PARAGRAPH

3′-UTR, 3′-untranslated region; ApoE, apolipoprotein E; CtlEV, EVs isolated from control Huh7 hepatocytes; CVD, cardiovascular disease; DIO, diet-induced obese; DIOEV, hepatocyte-derived EVs isolated from DIO mice; EV, extracellular vesicle; FFA, free fatty acid; HFD, high-fat diet; HUVEC, human umbilical vein endothelial cells; ICAM1, intercellular adhesion molecule 1; IL1B, interleukin 1B; KLF4, Kruppel-like factor 4; miR-1, microRNA-1; MMP1, matrix metalloproteinase 1; NAFLD, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease; NC, normal control; NCEV, hepatocyte-derived EVs isolated from NC mice; NTA, nanoparticle tracking analysis; PA, palmitic acid; PAEV, EVs isolated from PA-treated Huh7 hepatocytes; PMH, primary murine hepatocytes; qPCR, quantitative real-time PCR; RT-PCR, reverse transcription PCR; RLA, Renilla luciferase activity; TNFα, tumor necrosis factor-α; VCAM1, vascular cell adhesion molecule 1.

SECTION

Financial support

PARAGRAPH

This work was supported by grants from National Natural Science Foundation of China (81561128014 and 81870559 to P.X.) and Fudan Distinguished Professorship (to P.X.).

SECTION

Conflict of interest

PARAGRAPH

The authors declare no conflicts of interest that pertain to this work.

PARAGRAPH

Please refer to the accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.

SECTION

Authors’ contributions

PARAGRAPH

P.X. conceived and supervised the study; F.J. designed and performed the major part of research and analyzed data; Q.C. and W.W. conducted a part of experiments; Y.L. and Y.Y. were involved in analysis and interpretation of the data.

P.X. wrote the manuscript.