10.1016/j.engappai.2019.02.019

ABSTRACT

TITLE

A new hierarchical approach to requirement analysis of problems in automated planning

PARAGRAPH

The use of Knowledge Engineering (KE) processes to analyze and configure domains in automated planning is becoming more appealing since it was noticed that this issue could make a difference to solve real problems.

The contrast between a generic domain independent approach, taken as canonical in AI, and alternative processes that include knowledge engineering – eventually adding specific knowledge – has been discussed by Computer and Engineering communities.

A big impact has been noticed mainly in the early phase of requirement analysis when KE approach is normally introduced.

Requirement analysis is responsible for carrying out the Knowledge modeling of both problem and work domains, which is a key issue to guide different planner algorithms to come out with efficient solutions.

Also, there is the scalability issue that appear in most real problems.

To face that, hierarchical methods played an important hole in the history of planning and inspired several solutions since the proposal of NONLIN in the 70’s.

Since then, the idea of associating hierarchical relational nets with partial ordered actions has prevailed when large systems were considered.

However, there is still a gap between the hierarchical approach and the state of art of requirements analysis to allow features anticipated by KE approach to really appear in the requirements of a planning process.

This paper proposes a pathway to solve this gap starting with requirements elicitation represented first in the conventional semi-formal (diagrammatic) language – UML – that is translated to Hierarchical Petri Nets (HPNs) by a new enhanced algorithm.

The proposed process was installed in a software tool – developed by one of the authors – that analyzes the performance of the KE planning model: itSIMPLE (Integrated Tools Software Interface for Modeling Planning Environment).

This tool was initially designed to use classic Place/Transition nets and an old version of UML (2.1).

It is now enhanced to use UML 2.4 and a hierarchical Petri Net extension, also developed by the authors.

Realistic examples illustrate the process which is now being applied to larger problems related to the manufacturing of car sequencing domain, one of challenge of ROADEF 2005 (French Operations Research & Decision Support Society).

Finally, we consider the possibility to introduce another approach to the KE process by using KAOS (Keep All Object Satisfied) to make the planning design more accurate.