10.1016/j.jhep.2018.12.028

ABSTRACT

TITLE

Generation of hepatobiliary organoids from human induced pluripotent stem cells

PARAGRAPH

Human induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC)-derived liver modeling systems have the potential to overcome the shortage of donors for clinical application and become a model for drug development.

Although several strategies are available to generate hepatic micro-tissues, few have succeeded in generating a liver organoid with hepatobiliary structure from hiPSCs.

PARAGRAPH

At differentiation stages I and II (day 1–15), 25% of mTeSR™ culture medium was added to hepatic differentiation medium to induce endodermal and mesodermal commitment and thereafter hepatic and biliary co-differentiation.

At stage III (day 15–45), 10% cholesterol+ MIX was added to the maturation medium to promote the formation and maturation of the hepatobiliary organoids.

Phenotypes and functions of organoids were determined by specific markers and multiple functional assays both in vitro and in vivo.

PARAGRAPH

In this system, hiPSCs were induced to form 3D hepatobiliary organoids and to some extent recapitulated key aspects of early hepatogenesis in a parallel fashion.

The organoids displayed a series of functional attributes.

Specifically, the induced hepatocyte-like cells could take up indocyanine green, accumulate lipid and glycogen, and displayed appropriate secretion ability (albumin and urea) and drug metabolic ability (CYP3A4 activity and inducibility); the biliary structures in the system showed gamma glutamyltransferase activity and the ability to efflux rhodamine and store bile acids.

Furthermore, after transplantation into the immune-deficient mice, the organoids survived for more than 8 weeks.

PARAGRAPH

This is the first time that functional hepatobiliary organoids have been generated from hiPSCs.

The organoid model will be useful for in vitro studies of the molecular mechanisms of liver development and has important potential in the therapy of liver diseases.

