10.1016/j.jasrep.2018.10.017

FULLTEXT

TITLE

“The place is full of cabbages”: An analysis of the Irish Late Mesolithic stone tool technology from Kenure, Co. Dublin

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

For nearly a century, archaeological remains dating to the Irish Later Mesolithic (~7000–5500 BP; hereafter ILM) have been documented along Ireland's coastlines and waterways.

Yet, ILM lithic industries remain known mostly from a small number of excavated sites and a scattering of surface assemblages.

This paper offers an assessment of a somewhat odd source of information on variability in ILM lithic technology: the surface collections made by Gwendoline C. Stacpoole in the 1940s at locations along the Leinster coast north of Dublin (Liversage, 1961; Stacpoole, 1963; Woodman, 1977a, 1978).

These assemblages are obviously not without some serious problems in terms of provenience.

Their collection was poorly documented and their chronology is ambiguous relative to systematically excavated sites from this time period.

Yet, what the Stacpoole collections lack in documentation quality, they perhaps make up for in quantity.

Housed in the National Museum of Ireland in Dublin, these collections likely include hundreds of thousands of lithic artifacts.1

While it is clear that not all of these lithics belong to the ILM, most of them probably do.

In particular, on the basis of index typology at least, the Stacpoole collection from the site of Kenure, Co.

Dublin, appears to be dominated by ILM artifacts.

Thus, while far from perfect, the Kenure collection would seem to be a useful and under-explored sources of information about the ILM.

PARAGRAPH

In this paper, I present an analysis of a sample of the Stacpoole collection from Kenure.

After giving some background concerning the fieldwork responsible for this collection, I first present a typological assessment of the collection with particular interest in the assemblage's chronology.

Here, I try to look beyond initial characterizations of the Kenure lithic assemblage as belonging to the “Larnian Industry” based on its “crude” qualities and the general absence of lithic type fossils that might be indicative of earlier or later periods (Liversage, 1961; Stacpoole, 1963; contra Woodman, 1977a, 1978).

I also found some affirmative evidence for a ILM age for the Kenure assemblage in the form of type fossils and knapping techniques belonging to this period.

Thus, in spite of all of its problems, I conclude that much of the Kenure assemblage can tentatively be viewed as belonging to the later phase of the ILM.

PARAGRAPH

Proceeding from this preliminary conclusion concerning the age of the Kenure assemblage, I offer a brief discussion of the implications of my data for our understanding of technological organization in the ILM.

Based on my analysis of this assemblage, I argue that knapping strategies were generally expedient, focusing primarily on the exploitation of locally occurring small cobbles of glacial till chert.

I also make the case for a model of lithic technological organization in which ILM hunter-gatherers collected stone raw materials during the course of local subsistence activities, knapped these expediently within the contexts of residential camps, selected certain resulting lithic components for a narrow range of formal tools, and used the resulting debitage to resolve other immediate technical problems within domestic contexts (perhaps especially the wooden components of foraging technology and architecture).

In concluding, I also offer some brief observations concerning future directions for research on the Stacpoole collections.

SECTION

Materials and methods

SECTION

The history of the Stacpoole collection and the provenience of the Kenure lithics

PARAGRAPH

In the 1940s, the Dublin-area avocational archaeologist Gwendoline C. Stacpoole conducted extensive surface collections of lithics at a number of what she considered to be “Larnian” sites along the Leinster coast (Liversage, 1961; Stacpoole, 1963).

She did so while corresponding with the archaeologist Frank Mitchell, who housed the resulting collection at Trinity College in Dublin.

It was ultimately accessioned by the National Museum of Ireland, where it remains today.

These collections were briefly described by Liversage (1961), who considered them to be mostly “Larnian” in age, and Stacpoole (1963) herself also briefly discussed these materials in a broader publication on “Larnian” prehistory, for which she received the Gold Medal of the Old Dublin Society (at the age of 78).

PARAGRAPH

The “Larnian Industry,” as understood at the time by Stacpoole and others involved in her surface collection activities, was a culture-historical term coined by Movius (1940) with reference to the type station of Curran Point, Larne, Co.

Antrim.

Initially, Movius (1940, 1942, 1953) and Mitchell (1949) both suggested that the “Larnian Industry” was a cultural “survival” of the Upper Paleolithic in the remote “Highland Zone of Britain” and was thus isolated from the influences of more sophisticated Mesolithic industries in continental Europe.

The main reason for this belief was the perception that the “Larnian Industry” was macrolithic and lacked the microlithic type fossils of Mesolithic of continental Europe.

Hence, Stacpoole likely recognized Kenure as “Larnian” primarily based on its macrolithic flake characteristics, as well as the absence of diagnostic lithic type fossils that might link it with a later age.

This belief in the primitiveness of the “Larnian Industry” was soon undermined; the term lost favor and was rapidly replaced by the Later Mesolithic terminology (Woodman, 1978).

Yet, its use by Liversage (1961) and Stacpoole (1963) reflects the mindset whereby Kenure was initially identified as a site belonging to the ILM.

PARAGRAPH

Out of the sites represented by the Stacpoole collection, and in consultation with the staff of National Museum of Ireland, I selected Kenure because all of the relevant sources agreed that it was the “richest” and most likely to be Mesolithic in age (Liversage, 1961; Stacpoole, 1963; Woodman, 1977a).

As near as I can reconstruct, Stacpoole collected an extremely large sample of lithics from the farm fields along the shoreline to the east of Kenure House near Rush (Fig. 1).

Stacpoole mentions the proximity of a ruined megalithic monument near the site of her collection at a cove once referred to as Brooke's End.

This almost certainly refers to the site of Knocklea or Giant's Hill (Ó Ríordáin, 1968).

This megalithic structure was apparently a passage grave, though its remains no longer exist.

Based on Stacpoole's accounts, I place the site of the lithic collections in the farm fields between the Skerries Road (R128) and the Knocklea megalithic tomb.

PARAGRAPH

The provenience of the Kenure material was mostly documented by Stacpoole writing notes on the paper bags and boxes in which the material was collected, transmitted to Mitchell, and stored.

Stacpoole also corresponded with Mitchell by writing short notes (many of which are quite charming) on the paper bags in which she collected the materials (Fig. 2).

It is also clear that Stacpoole did some basic sorting of the materials before sending them to Mitchell and she sometimes noted the categories into which she placed various lithic artifacts on the bags and boxes.

None of Stacpoole's notes, unfortunately, give any finer-grained information about where they were collected.

PARAGRAPH

Obviously, the taphonomic context of the surface assemblages collected by Stacpoole is complex and, therefore, the determination of the chronology of the Kenure lithics is somewhat problematic.

The upland geological surface upon which these archaeological remains were deposited has been fairly stable since the end of the Pleistocene, meaning that the repeated occupations of this site over time likely formed a palimpsest of archaeological remains.

The nearby Drumanagh peninsula was also the location of several millennia of human occupation and is now mostly famous for its Iron Age remains (e.g. Boyle, 2017).

In short, it is very likely that the surface materials collected by Stacpoole were time-averaged, mixed, and significantly disturbed by post-Stone Age human activities.

PARAGRAPH

Hence, the most important and difficult analytical issue for the Kenure collection is the assessment of its age.

Much time has passed since Stacpoole, Mitchell, and Liversage's initial diagnoses of the Kenure lithics as “Larnian” (Liversage, 1961; Stacpoole, 1963) and there has since been some much-deserved skepticism about the ages of these surface collections.

Woodman (1977a, 24–25) has accurately summed up this line of skepticism:

PARAGRAPH

Liversage [1961] seems to have assumed that because these sites are coastal they are to a large extent Mesolithic.

His main chacteristics [sic] for a ‘Larnian’ industry are either negative or which can be only quantified in sealed or closed assemblages.

He is prepared to see in a poor technique a ‘Larnian’ presence.

The main characteristics for this industry are the presence of blades, retouch rare, flat retouch absent, technique for flint working crude and normal implement types i.e., microliths rare.

Present are notched flakes, rough scrapers and perforators… Negative characteristics are not adequate ways of defining an industry.

PARAGRAPH

Here, I agree with Woodman that the logic behind the initial classification of the Kenure assemblage as “Larnian” was not well-supported on the basis of information that was published.

Yet, based on my analysis of a sample of this material, I wonder if it might be the case that Liversage (1961) was right for the wrong reasons.

PARAGRAPH

Given the provenience of the Kenure collection, the only available way of addressing the issue of the chronology of the Kenure assemblage is through typology.

Historically, ILM chipped stone industries have been characterized as macrolithic and defined by (1) the presence of two main type fossils, Bann flakes and uniplane cores, (2) generally expedient core reduction strategies, (3) the exclusive use of hard hammer percussion, and (4) a range of retouched scraper, notched tool, and borer forms, all of which were produced through “flat,” or abrupt, direct percussion retouching of flake edges (as opposed to invasive retouching and/or the use of pressure flaking).

These defining features have been presented variously but consistently by a number of researchers, including Movius (1940, 1942, 1953), Mitchell (1949, 1971), Liversage (1961), Woodman (1977a, 1978; Woodman and Anderson, 1990; Woodman and Johnson, 1996; Woodman et al., 1999), Peterson (1990), and others (Costa et al., 2005; Driscoll, 2006; Kimball, 2006; Warren et al., 2009).

In contrast, there is greater analytical ambiguity in purely defining the ILM in contrast with the Irish Early Mesolithic or Mesolithic industries elsewhere in Western Europe (which are microlithic) or with subsequent Neolithic industries (which have their own distinctive set of technological and typological feature).

SECTION

Typological analysis

PARAGRAPH

In my analysis, I examined a sample of 1054 lithics, which is a small fraction of the total Kenure material.

Table 1 presents the frequencies of various lithic artifact types identified in my analysis.

First, the inventory of lithic artifact types within this sample is quite consistent the features of the ILM listed above.

The presence of Bann flakes, perhaps, is the clearest indication of this.

Very briefly, Bann flakes can be defined in the strictest sense as large flakes with convergent edges and basal retouch or “butt trimming.”

Woodman and Anderson (1990, 379) prefer the term “Butt Trimmed Form” because, as they state:

PARAGRAPH

The term Bann Flake has often been used to describe any large leaf shaped flake.

This form of flake could exist in any industry using a direct hard hammer percussion technology.

The term Butt Trimmed Flake emphasizes the fact that the forms must be trimmed at the proximal end along at least one lateral edge for 1.5 cm.

PARAGRAPH

As I will discuss in greater detail below, I think there is actually a good deal of technological and formal variability in items belonging to what I will call the Bann flake spectrum.

Woodman and Anderson (1990) clearly have a point concerning the potential ambiguity of the Bann flake type in the absence of the strict definition provided by the “Butt Trimmed Form” category.

Yet, at Kenure at least, there is clear evidence for the local production of convergent flakes, some of which were basally retouched and some of which were not.

For the current purposes of typological chronology, I can report that there are 18 pieces that I have classified as convergent flakes, 6 of which are true Bann flakes, or “Butt Trimmed Forms,” with the characteristic abrupt retouch at their bases (Fig. 3).

In other words, as a matter of index typology, the Kenure assemblage has a substantial frequency of Bann flakes/Butt Trimmed Forms.

PARAGRAPH

Next, uniplane cores are also common in the Kenure assemblage.

In a formal rather than technological sense, uniplane cores can be defined as those where less than half of the circumference of the core has been flaked, often resulting in a very shallow convexity on the flaked surface (Woodman, 1974; Woodman and Anderson, 1990; Anderson and Johnson, 1993; Woodman and Johnson, 1996).

As I will again discuss further below, in a technical sense, uniplane cores are generally single platform cores with a series of parallel flake removals on one surface (see especially Anderson and Johnson, 1993, and Woodman and Johnson, 1996), which results in the distinctive morphology of this typological category.

The vast majority of the cores in the assemblage at Kenure are single platform and most of these are consistent with the uniplane core type (Fig. 4).

On the one hand, this can be taken as strong evidence for assigning an ILM age to the Kenure assemblage.

On the other hand, this phenomenon may also be related to the nature of available lithic raw materials, which might have constrained the knapping techniques used—this issue is discussed further below.

PARAGRAPH

Next, all of the direct percussion core and flake debris was consistent with the use of hard hammers.

I found none of the morphological markers of soft-hammer percussion, such as platform lipping.2

In addition, the flakes in this assemblage were characterized by prominent and robust bulbs of percussion, large striking platforms relative to the size of flakes, and bulky cross-sections, all of which are typical of the use of hard hammers (Whittaker, 1994; Pelcin, 1997).

In addition, platforms often exhibited bruising/scarring from hammer impacts, which suggests both the use of hard hammers and the application of a great deal of force.

Hence, while the distinction between hard hammer and soft hammer percussion was not the primary focus of my analysis, I saw no signs of anything but the use of hard hammers, which is consistent with prior characterizations of the ILM (Woodman, 1977a, 1978; Peterson, 1990; Woodman and Anderson, 1990; Anderson and Johnson, 1993; Woodman and Johnson, 1996; Costa et al., 2005; Driscoll, 2006; Warren et al., 2009).

PARAGRAPH

Likewise, all of the retouch on tools is abrupt or “flat,” and was also likely executed with hard hammer percussion.

There are sizeable frequencies of retouched tool forms (Fig. 5), mostly scrapers, notches, denticulates, and borers—all of which have been variously mentioned as defining elements of ILM industries (e.g. Woodman, 1977a, 1978; Woodman and Anderson, 1990; Woodman and Johnson, 1996).

In total, these retouched tool forms make up ~14% of the Kenure lithic assemblage.

While this is quite a large fraction of the total, caution may be warranted since it is possible that there was intentional selection for retouched tool forms in Stacpoole's collection and sorting of the lithic artifacts.

PARAGRAPH

The most divergent characteristic from the canonical description of the ILM is the relatively large number of bipolar pieces.

Prior to Peterson (1990), bipolar knapping had never been documented in the ILM (which Peterson notes based on personal communication with Woodman).

In her discussion of the evidence of bipolar knapping during the ILM from the Ballylough Archaeological Project (BLAP), Peterson argues that the bipolar technique was an adaptation to the characteristics of local lithic raw materials, which (like Kenure) were dominated by small cobbles of gracial till chert.

As I will discuss later, it certainly seems plausible that bipolar knapping was an adaptation to the nature of locally available lithic raw materials at Kenure, as Peterson argued for the BLAP lithics.

Furthermore, I am not convinced that the presence of bipolar knapping suggests anything firm about the chronology of the Kenure assemblage, though I recognize that this may be a controversial point.

PARAGRAPH

All things considered, I feel that the most sensible conclusion is that the Kenure assemblage represents a palimpsest of lithic debris on a stable geological surface accumulated over a time period spanning the ILM, as well as possibly earlier and later periods.

My strong suspicion is that the majority of the Kenure materials belong to the ILM, though I am aware that this may well be the most controversial point of this paper.

More generally, it may be that the chronology of the Stacpoole collection is an unanswerable question—though I would like to think not.

Stacpoole invested an unfathomable amount of time in making this collection and, therefore, I think I owe it to her to come up with some kind of assessment of the chronology these lithics.

For me, all the signs point to an ILM age, though I admit that there is a bad legacy of evolutionary typology associated with the “Larnian Industry” in general and the Stacpoole collection specifically.

While I certainly would not stake my life on it, I think it is reasonable to proceed cautiously with the assumption that the majority of the Kenure assemblage belongs mostly to the ILM.

SECTION

Lithic technological analytical methods

PARAGRAPH

In my examination of the Kenure lithic assemblage, I conducted an attribute analysis in which I recorded a variety of technological and typological characteristics for individual pieces.

First, I classified all lithic pieces according to their raw material type.

For whole flakes, I recorded all linear dimensions (length, width, thickness), and dorsal cortex coverage according to the “Toth type” system (Toth, 1985).

For all whole flakes and broken flakes, I recorded striking platform faceting and platform width, and I also noted any other forms of platform modification.

For all cores, I recorded mass and all linear dimensions, I counted flake scars, and I made notes concerning the orientations of flake removals vis a vis evident strategies of core reduction.

Finally, for all retouched pieces, I recorded mass and all linear dimensions, and I made notes concerning the locations and tactics of retouch.

SECTION

Results

PARAGRAPH

In terms of the lithic raw materials represented in the Kenure assemblage, the vast majority of pieces (94.4%) were made on locally available cobbles of glacial till chert, or what many archaeologists have tended to refer to as glacial till “flint” (Driscoll et al., 2016).

These glacial till cherts are lustrous, fine-grained, mostly free from inclusions, and vary between off-white and light grey in color.

Without delving into the controversy over the distinction between flint and chert, the glacial till chert at Kenure would seem to be typical of the Cretaceous chert (a.k.a. flint) deposits located along the coasts of northern and eastern Ireland and not the Carboniferous cherts of the Irish interior (Driscoll et al., 2016).

Many lithic pieces, especially the cores, preserve thick cortical rinds, which are typical of tumbled and weathered pieces of glacial till.

The remainder of the assemblage also includes low frequencies of jasper, calcedony, quartz, and other varieties of chert, all of which also have thick cortical rinds.

Finally, there are 3 pieces (comprising 0.3% of the assemblage) made on festoon chert typical of the Irish midlands and which do not exhibit the glacial till cobble exterior morphology.

PARAGRAPH

The lithic pieces from Kenure are also generally coated with a white semi-opaque patina (see Woodman and Johnson, 1996, for a discussion of this phenomenon at Bay Farm).

This patina covers the flake scars as well as the unmodified surfaces of the lithic artifacts, though the thickness of the patina coverage on flaked surfaces varies considerably.

Stacpoole (1963) also noticed this patina and suggested that it might be used as a relative index of the antiquity of the flaked stone objects present at Kenure.

While I doubt the overall utility of this patina for dating purposes, I do tend to agree that variability in patina thickness likely varies to some extent with the age of the artifacts.

In addition, the opacity of the patina also makes the diagnosis of raw material characteristics somewhat more difficult than it might be otherwise.

PARAGRAPH

Overall, the Kenure assemblage is characterized by small flake sizes (Fig. 6).

The whole flakes had a mean length of 32.7 mm (SD = 11.8) and mean width of 23.0 mm (SD = 9.2).

Core sizes are also fairly small (Fig. 7), though there are a few somewhat larger outliers.

The total core assemblage had a mean length of 44.2 mm (SD = 8.3), a mean width of 35.6 mm (SD = 6.7), and a mean mass of 37.9 g (SD = 18.9).

The cores fitting the definition of the uniplane core type are also quite small, with a mean length of 50.1 mm (SD = 7.5), a mean width of 39.0 (SD = 4.8), and a mean mass of 39.0 (SD = 20.9).

Though no unmodified cobbles of lithic raw material were present in the Kenure assemblages, it seems likely that available raw materials were quite small.

The largest core in the assemblage is an elongated single platform core with a length of 66 mm and a mass of 97 g. Aside from the initial blow, which set up the main striking platform of the core, none of the subsequent flake removals truncated its length.

Therefore, it is highly unlikely that the original length of this core exceeded 100 mm; and again, this specimen is exceptionally large in comparison with the rest of the core assemblage.

PARAGRAPH

Next, the striking platform characteristics present within the Kenure assemblage are also consistent with the reduction of small nodules of lithic raw material (Fig. 8).

Striking platform widths are small but variable, with a mean of 12.1 mm and a standard deviation of 6.0 mm.

In addition, the Kenure striking platforms are overwhelmingly single-faceted or cortical, with only 11.7% of platforms having two or more facets (Fig. 9).

This could be taken as a sign of generally expedient core reduction strategies in combination with small core sizes, as multifaceted striking platforms are often taken as a marker of more complex approaches to core reduction.

It is also a reflection of the prevalence of a single platform core reduction strategy.

PARAGRAPH

Other lines of evidence also support this finding of relatively short reduction sequences.

Fig. 10 reports the frequencies of dorsal cortex types according to the so-called “Toth type” system (Toth, 1985).

Clearly, the whole flake assemblage is characterized by high frequencies of cortex.

Approximately 96.5% of the Kenure whole flakes had some cortex on the dorsal surfaces or striking platforms and 34.3% were completely cortical.

This again clearly points to short sequences of core reduction, with small raw material size likely at the root of this pattern.

Finally, the counts of flake scars on cores also clearly support this same conclusion, with a mean of only 8.49 (Fig. 11).

PARAGRAPH

The core reduction strategies used at Kenure were apparently were mostly expedient, though there were some more systematic variants, which appear to have been used in relation to the characteristics of local lithic raw materials.

In general, it seems that small rounded cobbles of glacial till were reduced using a single platform core reduction strategy (Fig. 12).

This generally began with the splitting of the cobble or at least the removal of a large pebble-splitting flake from one end of core.

This initial flake removal created a striking platform that was subsequently the location of flake removals.

Flake removals then tended to focus on one face of the core, accounting for the observed frequency of “uniplane” cores in the Kenure assemblage.

Finally, all of the cores and core fragments in the Kenure assemblage were made on the locally occurring glacial till chert lithic raw material.

In combination with the technical features of flake assemblage, this strongly suggests a local origin for all of the cores.

PARAGRAPH

In some cases, however, the single platform core strategy was adapted to produce small blades.

In such instances, knappers took advantage of naturally occurring convexities on the core surfaces produced by previous flake removals to produce elongated debitage.

As core reduction progressed, the use of such natural convexities gave way to the exploitation of ridges resulting from previous blade removals, allowing knappers to remove a number of small blades with relatively consistent size/shape characteristics (Fig. 13).

It should be noted that, while there are significant quantities of typological blades at Kenure, they lack most of the technical features associated with the Mesolithic elsewhere in Western Europe and earlier in Ireland.

As with the other forms of flake production at Kenure, all of the blades were apparently produced using hard hammer percussion, with no signs of the use of soft hammer percussion, indirect percussion, or pressure flaking.

Similarly, there was no backing or truncation of blades, though several specimens were retouched with notching.

While the Kenure assemblage is mostly characterized by expedient knapping, whole and broken blades make up around 16.4% of the flake assemblage (calculated as the percentage of whole and broken blades from the total assemblage of whole and broken flakes).

PARAGRAPH

Convergent flakes are the other kind of specialized debitage present in the Kenure assemblage.

There are 18 convergent flakes in the assemblage (including 15 whole and 3 broken specimens), comprising 6.7% of the total flake assemblage (again calculated as the percentage of whole and broken convergent flakes from the total assemblage of whole and broken flakes).

The whole convergent flakes had a mean length of 41.1 mm (SD = 9.0) and a mean width of 22.0 mm (SD = 5.7) Only 6 of these convergent flakes (5 whole and 1 broken) are consistent with the Woodman and Anderson (1990) definition of Butt Trimmed Forms, having a mean length of 48.8 mm (SD = 10.8 mm) and a mean width of 30.8 mm (SD = 12.2).

Once again, all of the convergent flakes were made on locally occurring glacial till chert lithic raw materials.

In addition, the 3 broken convergent flakes all exhibit bending fractures, which are likely attributable to breakage during the process of manufacture.

PARAGRAPH

In certain respects, the convergent flake assemblage from Kenure reflects some interesting technical characteristics of the Bann flake spectrum.

First, as a knapper with >20 years of experience, it has been my experience that convergent flakes of this sort seldom happen by accident in the process of expedient reduction of cores (see also Woodman and Johnson, 1996, for a discussion of the issue of intentionality in Bann flake production at Bay Farm).

Producing convergent flakes requires some engineering of core convexities to produce a roughly triangular flakes.

Second, none of the cores from Kenure show any direct evidence for the reduction strategies involved in the production of convergent flakes.

Third, variability in convergent flake morphology at Kenure would seem to have implications for both the core reductions strategies used to produce them and their place in the broader organization of stone tool manufacture activities.

PARAGRAPH

As with blade production at Kenure, I suspect that the convergent flakes were also produced using a single platform core reduction strategy, which took advantage of the geometry of previous flake removals in order to produce triangular flakes.

The Kenure convergent flakes show no signs of platform faceting that would be consistent with the Levallois technique or other more specialized core reduction techniques.

Instead, the fact that all of the convergent flake striking platforms are single-faceted suggests to me that they were produced using a single platform core reduction technique (Fig. 14), which is prevalent throughout the Kenure assemblage, and that they were removed relatively early in sequences of core reduction.

While no cores showed any direct evidence for convergent flake production (i.e. flake scars left behind from the removal of convergent flakes), this is not altogether unexpected, since convergent flakes were apparently removed early in core reduction sequences and resulting flake scars were likely erased by subsequent core reduction.

Several of the convergent flakes also show signs of platform abrasion, which is a fairly common strategy for facilitating difficult flake removals (Whittaker, 1994)—not unexpected in this case since the removal of convergent flakes would likely have been a fairly tricky affair.

PARAGRAPH

The facts that all of the convergent flakes (including the classic Butt Trimmed Forms) (1) were made on locally available raw materials, (2) were produced using the same core reduction techniques as the bulk of the rest of the lithic assemblage, and (3) exhibit a moderate frequency of what are likely breakages resulting from manufacture errors all point to the local production of this tool form and the absence of its importation from distant localities.

As I will discuss further below, this pattern is consistent with what we know about other ILM lithic production sites and it may be the case that convergent flakes were into personal gear toolkits and transported away from site of their initial manufacture.

PARAGRAPH

If I am correct, the core reduction technique involved in the production of these convergent flakes may have been similar to those observed in the manufacture of Leilira blades, or “men's knives,” by modern Australian hunter-gatherer groups in the Central Desert of Australia (Binford and O'Connell, 1984; Binford, 1986; McCall, 2012).

As Binford and O'Connell (1984) observe, the production of Leilira blades generally involves the reduction of cores using a single platform strategy and results in the production flake forms with some striking formal similarities.

In this sense, they are also consistent with the definitions of “pseudo-Levallois points” described elsewhere in Middle Paleolithic contexts (Huxtable et al., 1992; Adam, 2002).

Like Bann flakes, Leilira blades are also often basally retouched for the purposes of hafting as both spears points and knives, and they are also sometimes distally trimmed for the purposes of shaping.

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

The characteristics of the Kenure lithic assemblage are consistently similar with previous accounts of the Later Mesolithic from across Ireland.

From Movius (1940, 1942, 1953) onward, there is basic agreement about the knapping techniques and typological features of the ILM (Mitchell, 1949, 1971; Woodman, 1977a; Peterson, 1990; Woodman and Anderson, 1990; Anderson and Johnson, 1993; Woodman and Johnson, 1996; Woodman et al., 1999; Costa et al., 2005; Driscoll, 2006; Kimball, 2000, 2006; Warren et al., 2009).

This is true primarily in terms of the production of a macrolithic flake technology, the use of hard hammer percussion, and the presence of a certain set of diagnostic tool and core forms (especially Butt Trimmed Forms and uniplane cores).

Above all, the features of the Kenure lithic assemblage fit the longstanding characterization of ILM lithic industries as focused on expedient flake production (Woodman and Anderson, 1990; Peterson, 1990; Costa et al., 2005), though what exactly that means warrants a bit of unpacking.

PARAGRAPH

Previous scholarship on expedient lithic technology is relevant to thinking about the knapping strategies evident in the Kenure assemblage.

In an early seminal discussion, Parry and Kelly (1987) generalize that most lithic technology in later prehistoric sedentary societies has tended to be expedient.

They explain this pattern by arguing that sedentary societies have the ability to accumulate lithic raw materials at residential sites, obviating the need for more technically difficult and labor-intensive knapping strategies to cope with raw material scarcity in the context of mobility (see also papers in Horowitz and McCall, n.d.).

Likewise, while I have questioned certain elements of the Parry and Kelly (1987) scenario, I have argued that expedient lithic technologies are a common feature of societies in which the location, timing, and technical requirements of activities requiring stone tools were predictable and stable (McCall, 2012; see also Kuhn, 1992).

In other words, expedient flaking becomes a dominant strategy in situations where knappers know that they will have access to lithic raw materials at the places where they will need stone tools and where the scheduling of tasks is not a pressing factor (i.e. carving the wooden posts of a fish trap as opposed to killing a wild pig with a stone-tipped spear).

PARAGRAPH

In this respect, sedentism is one common form of settlement system with organizational characteristics that favor expedient knapping strategies, such as those evident at Kenure, though other organizational circumstance are also sometimes involved.

Similarly, the distinction between the use of stone tools as elements of extractive foraging technology versus as tools for making and maintaining other tools is a useful in thinking about the Kenure assemblage and ILM lithic technology more broadly.

Many researchers have linked expedient stone tools, such as those prevalent during the ILM, with the manufacture and maintenance of the plastic components of other tools, such as wooden handles and shafts of various tools and weapons (Woodman, 1978; Binford, 1986; Parry and Kelly, 1987; Nelson, 1991; Kuhn, 1992; McCall, 2012; Ahlman et al., 2014; Horowitz and McCall, n.d.).

Such tasks were generally accomplished through expedient knapping in residential contexts followed by the ad hoc selection of flakes capable of performing required tasks.

Conversely, the majority of expedient lithic technology tends not to be integrated into extractive foraging technology as elements of the personal gear carried by individual foragers.

PARAGRAPH

With specific reference to ILM lithic technologies, Woodman (1978) has suggested that the expedient stone tools used in the manufacture of the wooden components of fish traps and other wooden components of fishing gear (see also Woodman and Anderson, 1990, and Little, 2009a).

Such fish traps are now known from the Liffey estuary in Dublin, where wooden components do indeed demonstrate that wooden stakes were shaped using lithic technology (McQuade and O'Donnell, 2007).

Similarly, wooden platforms are now known to be a regular feature of ILM sites located along interior waterways, such as those known at Derragh Island on Lough Kinale (Fredengren, 2002, 2004) and Clonava Island on Lough Derravaragh (Mitchell, 1972; Little, 2009a, 2009b).

More broadly, Woodman argues that the transition from the microlithic Early Mesolithic to the macrolithic Later Mesolithic resulted from a decline in the use of complex multicomponent tools and weapons for terrestrial hunting and an increasing reliance on marine resources requiring simple wooden technologies; in other words, the shift to a nearly exclusive use of stone tools in the manufacture and maintenance of other tools.

PARAGRAPH

Other characteristics of ILM lithic technology would seem to support this tools-making-other-tools scenario.

Most commentators agree that the vast majority of ILM stone tools were handheld rather than being hafted (Woodman et al., 1999; Costa et al., 2005).

In addition, the retouched tools are generally steeply retouched and dominated by scraper, notch, denticulate, and borer forms.

These kinds of retouched tools are widely known from other contexts to be used in the processing of wood, bone, shell, and hide materials—among other things (Keeley, 1980, 1988; Kamminga, 1982; Beyries, 1988; Hardy and Garufi, 1998; Rots, 2005; Mazzucco et al., 2016).

In this respect, many of both the unmodified flakes and the retouched tools at Kenure had significant macroscopically visible edge damage consistent with heavy-duty usages like the working of wood, bone, or shell (Fig. 15).

PARAGRAPH

Next, I think the evidence for bipolar knapping and blade production at Kenure warrants a few words, as I think that this also potentially relates to the general pattern of lithic technological expediency.

On the one hand, the bipolar knapping at Kenure is probably the most divergent characteristic of the assemblage from the standpoint of other known ILM stone tool assemblages.

In this sense, and as others have done recently (Driscoll et al., 2014), it would be easy to explain the bipolar lithic technology as a component belonging to a later Neolithic or Bronze Age site use.

Yet, in spite of the contextual problems, I am not entirely convinced by this kind of culture-historical explanation.

Instead, I would argue that the presence of bipolar knapping is not necessarily surprising given the nature of the available lithic raw materials in the Kenure area.

PARAGRAPH

The small cobbles of glacial till chert exploited by the Kenure knappers obviously presented technical challenges.

One of the evident approaches for dealing with these problems was the adoption of a cobble splitting tactic as a starting point for single platform core reduction.

In other words, core reduction often began by removing the tops of cobbles, which resulted in a suitable platform for subsequent flake removals.

This approach was usually achieved by direct hard hammer percussion, though it was also apparently sometimes achieved through bipolar percussion.

This fact makes sense given that bipolar knapping is often thought to relate to the knapping of lithic raw materials that were simply too small to be knapped using direct percussion.

Bipolar knapping has often been noted as a tactic for dealing with small lithic raw material package sizes (Barham, 1987; Jeske, 1992; Hiscock, 2015; Villa et al., 2012; Pargeter, 2016), and this is probably also the case at Kenure.

PARAGRAPH

In support of this view, I can point to the fact that the mean length of the whole direct percussion cores (44.2 mm) is almost 29% larger than the mean length of the whole bipolar cores (34.3 mm), with an independent samples t-test achieving strong statistical significance (t = 5.82; df = 85; p < 0.001).

The direct percussion cores are quite small but the bipolar cores are significantly smaller still, and all of the above would have been challenging to knap using direct percussion.

In this case, I would suggest that the bipolar knapping was simply a way of coping with the small size of lithic raw materials.

Furthermore, I think that the small size of the lithic raw materials at Kenure also explains some of the other divergent features of this assemblage when compared with other ILM assemblages that had direct access to primary deposits of flint, such as Newferry (Woodman, 1977b) and Bay Farm (Anderson and Johnson, 1993; Woodman and Johnson, 1996), or direct access to abundant deposits of other lithic raw materials, such Ferriter's Cove (Woodman et al., 1999), Lough Allen (Driscoll, 2006; Driscoll et al., 2014), Clonava Island (Little, 2009b), and Belderrig (Driscoll and Warren, 2007).

In this sense, bipolar knapping may have been one of a range of adaptations to the small glacial till pebbles available in the Kenure area.

When large pieces of lithic raw material are present, it makes sense to me that bipolar percussion would be rare or absent.

PARAGRAPH

My argument here is by no means unprecedented.

Peterson (1990) makes the identical proposal regarding the occurrence of bipolar knapping in the BLAP survey from Southeastern Ireland.

In discussing experimentation with the locally available small cobble of glacial till flint, she states, “The only way to open these small cobbles initially was a hammer and anvil technique” (Peterson, 1990, 374).

Based partly on this observation, Peterson (1990, 374) goes on to form a more substantive conclusion:

PARAGRAPH

[B]ipolar technology has never previously been associated with Late Mesolithic assemblages… However, it would appear that given the local raw material size constraints, and no evidence for any widespread or organized strategy for procuring non-local raw materials, groups in the area, regardless of their temporal affiliation, made tools using a bipolar technique.

It is therefore necessary to define local variations in Late Mesolithic diagnostic criteria in order to identify correctly and adequately characterize the sites correctly.

PARAGRAPH

Based on my analysis of the Kenure assemblage, I concur with Peterson's explanation.

In addition, Kimball (2000) reports that bipolar cores make up 30% of the total core assemblage recovered by the Lough Swilly Archaeological Survey (LSAP) and Kimball also notes the high frequency of the exploitation of small pieces of glacial till chert lithic raw materials.

In this sense, there appear to be broad similarities between the ILM lithic industries at Kenure, Ballylough, and Lough Swilly based on the equivalence of available lithic raw materials.

For this set of reasons, I tend to view the bipolar knapping at Kenure not as a chronological marker but as variant of the prevalent expedient knapping strategy aimed at coping with the small size of available lithic raw materials.

PARAGRAPH

A similar phenomenon may also be responsible for the relatively high frequency of blade debris at Kenure.

Blade production has been noted in the ILM previously, though neither the typological features of these blades nor the technology of their production has been discussed much.

The standard explanation of blade production in the Western European Mesolithic is the production of modular tool components that were hafted in composite tools and weapons (Price, 1991; Eerkens, 1998; Jochim, 1998; Warren, 2006; Milner and Mithen, 2009).

In other Mesolithic contexts, including in the Early Irish Mesolithic, blades were produced using specialized core reduction techniques and were backed and/or truncated for hafting into composite tool armatures (Myers, 1986, 1989; Eerkens, 1998; Straus, 2002; Fisher, 2006; see also Clarkson et al., 2018 for a general discussion).

While I haven't formed many firm conclusions about the blade manufacture at Kenure, it is evident that it does not fit the pattern known in Ireland from Early Mesolithic sites like Mount Sandel (Woodman, 1985).

None of the bladelets show any signs of backing, truncation, or other features that might suggest hafting.

There is little formal standardization among them and they were apparently produced using the same technical strategies as the other lithic debris at Kenure, including both direct and bipolar percussion.

PARAGRAPH

I think that there are two plausible explanation for this pattern: First, it could be that the small blades at Kenure were somehow integrated into composite technologies and there are just no obvious signs of it.

Studies of hafting residues on bladelets in other regions, such as the Later Stone Age of Africa (e.g. Binneman and Mitchell, 1997), have suggested that the hafting of unmodified blade debris was perhaps more common than once thought, and this could well have happened in the case of ILM blade technology.

Second, it could be that blade production at Kenure was an unintended consequence of reducing small single platform cores while trying to maximize flake lengths by running flake removal “shots” along the ridges left behind by previous flake removals.

I tend to favor this latter explanation of the irregular bladelet technology at Kenure, though I generally consider it an open question.

And, of course, it is also possible that Stacpoole selected for blade-like objects in her surface collections and/or that blades are disproportionately represented in this sample by virtue of some kind of sorting activity.

PARAGRAPH

The Kenure assemblage also has some subtle but important things to say about the production of artifacts belonging to the Bann flake spectrum.

First, all of the evidence unequivocally points to the local production of convergent flakes, some of which were basally retouched into the classic Bann flake form.

This pattern is consistent with most other ILM sites where lithic production was a significant activity.

For example, at Bay Farm, there is considerable evidence, including refitted flaking sequences, for the local manufacture of Bann flakes integrated the broader knapping activities (Woodman and Johnson, 1996).

In contrast, reports of Bann flakes made on exotic lithic raw materials are rare (cf. Kimball, 2000), with the exception of the numerous discoveries of Bann flakes as isolated finds in the Irish interior (e.g. Woodman, 1978).

PARAGRAPH

Based on this contrasting distributional patterning between lithic manufacture locations and isolated findspots, several scholars have suggested that Bann flakes were elements of curated technology (Peterson, 1990; Woodman and Anderson, 1990).

I find this logic to be highly sensible, since Bann flakes are often found at interior findspots in the absence of lithic manufacture debris, suggesting that they were transported away from their location of manufacture and either lost or discarded in the field.

In addition, there is growing evidence for the hafting of Bann flakes based on the presence of resin residues (Little, 2014) and one possibility is that they were hafted as either spear tips or knives, or both—perhaps in fashions similar to those known for the previously mentioned Leilira knives in Australia (e.g. Akerman, 2007).

PARAGRAPH

Concerning Kenure, my argument would be that convergent flakes were produced locally as an element of broader knapping activities and were incorporated as a component of multifunctional tools/weapons.

Confining my speculation about the organizational disposition of Bann flakes here to a single sentence, I think it likely that they were elements of personal gear carried by hunter-gatherers who targeted unpredictable, randomly distributed food resources—as opposed to staging logistically oriented trips targeting known-in-advance resources using specialized technologies (Binford, 1979, 1980; Greaves, 1997; McCall, 2007), as earlier Mesolithic peoples in Ireland (and beyond) seem to have done (Woodman, 1985).

PARAGRAPH

Perhaps the area where lithic technology has the greatest capability of contributing more to our knowledge is in complicating the picture of ILM mobility and settlement.

In prior considerations of ILM settlement systems and mobility patterns, there has been considerable debate concerning whether ILM foragers employed a generalized residential foraging settlement system (sensu Binford, 1980) or a seasonal round in which they alternated between stable residential sites along the coast and adjacent to interior waterways (Woodman and Anderson, 1990; Fredengren, 2004; Little, 2009a; Kimball, 2006).

For Kimball (2006), the argument for low-population/high-mobility residential foraging rests on (1) the structure and scale of ILM archaeological sites, (2) the seasonality of food remains present at them, and (3) the absence of substantial terrestrially-focused residential camps in the Irish interior.

Kimball (2006, 240) therefore views ILM sites as “short-term food and raw material procurement and processing camps oriented toward coasts, estuaries, rivers, and lakes.”

Kimball also points to the lack of either stylistic variability or technical specialization in the ILM in suggesting that population sizes were small and foraging were highly generalized.

PARAGRAPH

For me, the consistent characteristics of ILM lithic technologies points to a more complex picture of settlement systems and mobility patterns than is implied by reference to generalized residential mobiltiy.

There is now lithic evidence sites spanning both coastal and interior contexts and range of lithic raw material types; from excavated sites including Newferry (Woodman, 1977b), Bay Farm (Woodman and Johnson, 1996); Ferriter's Cove (Woodman et al., 1999), Belderrig (Driscoll and Warren, 2007); Derragh Island (Fredengren, 2004, 2006), Clonava Island (Mitchell, 1972; Little, 2009a, 2009b); from extensive surface collections at Lough Allen (Driscoll, 2006; Driscoll et al., 2014) and Lough Gara (Fredengren, 2002); and from regional surveys including the BLAP (Green and Zvelebil, 1993), the Barrow Valley Archaeological Survey (Zvelebil et al., 1996), and the LSAP (Kimball, 2000).

All of these assemblages are overwhelmingly dominated by the exploitation of locally available lithic raw materials (likely embedded within local foraging activities; see Kimball, 2006), expedient knapping, and the production of a few key formal tool types, with Bann flakes being the most striking example.

ILM knappers apparently maintained this essential framework of technical approaches to lithic production while adapting to the characteristics of local lithic raw material.

Perhaps more importantly, it seems that the organizational contexts in which ILM lithic production occurred were fairly consistent across this great diversity of landscape locations, site structures, and raw material types.

In this sense, the lithic technology at Kenure would seem to represent a manifestation of this highly consistent ILM pattern adapted to the constraints of locally available glacial till chert cobbles.

PARAGRAPH

While I am not necessarily suggesting that ILM foragers were sedentary, the ubiquity and consistency of this pattern of expedient knapping focused on local raw materials does not lend support to the inferred pattern of high residential mobility and generalized foraging.

As Little (2009b, 136) puts it,

PARAGRAPH

If, as has been suggested, people were moving with the seasons and occupying coastal locations during the summer months, is it not peculiar that only one piece of flint out of the 2169 worked pieces of stone recovered from all the Mesolithic sites on Lough Derravaragh made its way—either as an item of exchange or as curated tool—back to this lake?

PARAGRAPH

For me, the answer to this question lies in the fact that ILM lithic technology was not integrated into the personal gear toolkits of foragers (with the likely exception of Bann flakes).

Instead, ILM foragers seem to have accumulated lithic raw materials at their residential sites, knapped them expediently, and used resulting flake debris in the manufacture of other (primarily wooden) technology.

Hence, stone tools were very rarely curated or transported away from the site of their initial manufacture.

PARAGRAPH

While such evidence is obviously not (by itself) sufficient to support an inference of sedentism or seasonal semi-sedentism, it does not fit the pattern expected for low-population density/high-mobility residential foragers as has been proposed by Kimball (2006) and others (Woodman and Anderson, 1990; Woodman et al., 1999; Costa et al., 2005; contra Fredengren, 2004, 2006; Little, 2009b).

Instead, ILM lithic production seems much more consistent with a pattern of the provisioning of places rather than the provisioning of people with lithic raw materials (Binford, 1977; Kuhn, 1992), which is a strategy usually associated with the predictable and repeated reuse of the same sites over time.

While this does not preclude the possibility of a high frequency of targeted residential moves in which sites were predictably reused over time, it is more consistent with a seasonal alternation between different residential camps, or perhaps even longer-term and more stable occupations of residential sites.

In any case, the lithic evidence from the ILM alone is not adequate to conclusively decide this debate and the lithics from Kenure certainly have more than their fair share of ambiguities in terms of their age, provenience, and archaeological context.

SECTION

Conclusion

PARAGRAPH

The lithic assemblage from Kenure collected by Gwendoline C. Stacpoole in the 1940s has the potential to be an important source of information about the ILM along the Leinster coast.

The provenience and chronology of this collection obviously has many problems, however, I think there is good reason to attribute the bulk of the collection to the ILM.

While the assemblage is likely heavily time-averaged, disturbed, and perhaps “cherry-picked” by the collector and analysts, it has much to offer in its size and diversity.

With specimens likely numbering in the hundreds of thousands, the Stacpoole collection from Kenure holds an enormous amount of information about core reduction strategies, knapping techniques, trajectories of retouched tool reduction, and beyond.

It could serve a beneficial function in providing a massive sample of artifacts with which to assess technological variability with particular artifact types.

PARAGRAPH

This analysis has served as a pilot study in providing some basic information about the nature of the Kenure assemblage and the inferences that can be drawn from it.

This study has shown that the features of the Kenure lithic debris are broadly consistent with prior characterizations of ILM stone tool technology as being macrolithic and expedient, though there were some striking adaptations to the nature of locally available lithic raw materials.

Direct hard hammer percussion was the predominant knapping method, though some bipolar percussion was also used.

Knappers tended to reduce cores made on small pebbles of locally occurring glacial till chert using single platform strategies, which sometimes resulted in the characteristic ILM uniplane core forms.

Retouched tools are dominated by scrapers and various notched tool forms.

Convergent flakes, including several belonging to the strict typological definitions of Bann flakes/Butt Trimmed Forms (Woodman and Anderson, 1990), and irregular blades also occur in moderate frequencies.

PARAGRAPH

Finally, I have offered some basic thoughts on the implications of this analysis for our understanding of ILM technological organization and the unusual nature of ILM settlement systems and mobility patterns.

It is here that I think lithic analysis has the most to offer in terms of our understanding of ILM life ways.

In this regard, technological analyses of assemblages like Kenure may serve as a vehicle for moving beyond the evolutionary typological thinking that has hindered our understanding of ILM expedient knapping in relation to the striking and perhaps unprecedent foraging economic systems to be found in the Middle Holocene of Ireland.