10.1016/j.jasrep.2018.09.007

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Integrating a complex late prehistoric settlement system: Neutron activation analysis of pottery use and exchange at Saruq al-Hadid, United Arab Emirates

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Pottery is ubiquitous at sites in the ancient Near East by the third millennium BCE.

Ceramic vessels are used for the preparation, storage, and consumption of food as well as a variety of less well understood ritual practices.

As a result, the study of pottery is an essential tool for illuminating past lifeways (Rice, 1987; Sinopoli, 1991).

In particular, the geochemical analysis of pottery has proved to be an effective means of gaining insight into patterns of production and exchange (Speakman and Glascock, 2007).

In the archaeology of the Near East, there is a tendency for the compositional analysis of ceramics to focus on pottery recovered from sedentary settlements, best typified by the man-made tells of mudbrick and stone that, following generation after generation of construction, collapse, and rebuilding, have come to loom over the surrounding agricultural plains.

However, integral segments of ancient Near Eastern society moved between these sedentary settlements and temporary sites (Bernbeck, 2008; Porter, 2012).

Much occurred beyond the sedentary villages, towns, and cities that is often not integrated into reconstructions of social and economic practice because of the difficulties associated with identifying temporary occupations and the allure of the mound.

Compositional analysis of pottery from a temporary site has the potential to fill-in this gap and tie the groups that gathered at these locations into the social and economic practices documented at sedentary settlements, creating a more accurate and complete picture of the past.

PARAGRAPH

Saruq al-Hadid (Emirate of Dubai, United Arab Emirates) is such a temporary site located in the northern Rub' al-Khali desert (Fig. 1).

Though extensive excavations have unearthed an area of approximately 7000 m2 there is no evidence for permanent architecture, only traces of what were ephemeral buildings (Fig. 2) (Casana et al., 2009; Herrmann et al., 2012; Weeks et al., 2017; Weeks et al., 2018).

What is even more remarkable is the fact that such temporary structures appear to have been erected episodically at Saruq al-Hadid for over a thousand years, with radiocarbon dates and stratigraphic evidence pointing to occupation levels from the late third millennium BCE to the early first millennium BCE and then after a hiatus of several centuries later periods of activity in the first and second millennia CE, leading to its designation as a ‘persistent temporary place’ (Weeks et al., 2018).

The absence of standing architectural remains contrasts sharply with contemporary settlements both inland and along the coast where mudbrick and stone constructions are common and where occupation is regarded as more continuous (Magee, 2014).

PARAGRAPH

This paper presents the results of the compositional analysis of the late third to first millennia BCE pottery from Saruq al-Hadid with the specific aim of gaining insight into how a temporary site was integrated into the regional economy.

This span of time is particularly critical in the history of southeastern Arabia, here defined as the modern states of the United Arab Emirates and northern Sultanate of Oman, because the archaeological record indicates a significant reduction in sedentary settlements during the early second millennium BCE before a floruit of new settlements at the start of the first millennium BCE.

Explanations for the changes observed in the settlement record have been tied to subsistence strategies: the reduction of settlements in the second millennium has been interpreted as evidence for increased mobility (Cleuziou, 1979, 1989a; Al-Jahwari and Kennet, 2008, 210; Magee, 2014, 187–189), and the sudden increase of settlements in the early first millennium has been linked to the development of falaj irrigation and the domestication of the dromedary camel (Magee, 2007).

Of the sites in the region excavated to date, only two sedentary sites – Tell Abraq and Kalba – have continuous stratified deposits that span the second and first millennia (Carter, 1997; Magee et al., 2017; Magee and Carter, 1999), and exclusively focusing on these sites risks perpetuating the error of not looking beyond the sedentary settlement.

A better understanding of the economic changes that occurred at Saruq al-Hadid, a persistent temporary place in the desert, sheds light not only on activities beyond these sedentary settlements but also this critical period of transition for southeastern Arabia.

SECTION

The geological and environmental backgrounds

SECTION

Production locales and local geology

PARAGRAPH

The sourcing of artifacts depends on the provenance postulate, which assumes that two samples analyzed from the same source will have less variation than two samples analyzed from different sources (Weigand et al., 1977).

While this postulate can be applied in a straightforward manner to comparatively homogenous naturally-occurring materials such as obsidian (Glascock and Neff, 2003, 1521), pottery is a heterogeneous anthropic mixture of natural materials – clays, tempers, and water – fired at high temperatures in variable atmospheres.

Each of these factors has the potential to impact the geochemistry of pottery (Arnold et al., 1991).

Geochemical data from pottery represent the summation of different choices learned by the potter and passed on within ever changing social, technological, and economic contexts.

Geochemical groupings of ceramics reflect the repetition of these same choices.

Local geology informs these choices, a point well attested in the ethnographic literature (e.g. Arnold, 1985, 38–42).

The choices made by the potter and shaped by the local geology combine to form a compositionally-identifiable ‘production locale’ for pottery.

It must be stressed that the production locale and workshop are not necessarily synonymous: workshops are archaeologically or ethnographically identified spaces where there is evidence of ceramic production, whereas production locale is a more elastic term that may include multiple workshops that combine compositionally indistinguishable raw materials.

The boundaries of the production locale depend upon the statistical analysis of geochemical data, and, therefore, change with the addition or subtraction of newly gathered data and the geographical scale of analysis.

PARAGRAPH

Fixing production locales to specific geographic areas is complex (e.g. Arnold et al., 1991).

This problem is compounded in the case of the al-Hajjar mountains, which stretch for 700 km in an arc from the northernmost point of the peninsula to the south and east and comprise seven major rock formations (Fig. 3) (Cooper et al., 2014; Glennie et al., 1974; Robertson and Searle, 1990).

Ethnographic reports suggest that clay deposits throughout the al-Hajjar mountains and various wadis were exploited for the production of pottery (Lancaster and Lancaster, 2010).

Two wadi systems require particular attention for the discussion of the pottery from Saruq al-Hadid.

Firstly, the Wadi Haqil system, which includes Wadi al-Bih and Wadi Ghail, drains the western half of the Aruma rock formations of the peninsula, depositing runoff near Shimal.

These rock formations consist largely of limestone and dolomite with some quartz and chert (Glennie et al., 1974).

Surveys have identified undated clay mines in Wadi Haqil and historical and ethnographic sources attest to its use in recent history for the production of pottery (Lancaster and Lancaster, 2010; Mitsuishi et al., 2013; Stocks, 1996).

Méry (2000, 270) and Magee (2011) have both suggested Wadi Haqil as one source for pottery production in prehistory.

Wadi Jizzi, which links the al-Ain oasis to the Batinah coast, passes through the Semail Ophiolite, a suite of rocks that includes serpentinite, peridotite, gabbro, basalt, dolerite, quartz diorite, mica, hornblende, and epidote (Glennie et al., 1974).

Maastrichtian and Cenozoic formations, consisting of limestone and marls, occur where Wadi Jizzi meets the al-Ain oasis (Glennie et al., 1974).

Compositional analyses of pottery from the third to first millennia BCE have pointed to this area as a likely source for ceramic production (Benoist and Méry, 2012, 78; Méry, 2000, 160–163).

SECTION

The environmental setting of Saruq al-Hadid

PARAGRAPH

Southeastern Arabia divides into several environmental zones with complementary resources (Tosi, 1975).

Goods, including pottery and its contents, moved between these zones throughout much of prehistory and into the early modern period (Magee, 2014).

As such, a study of the movement of the ceramics must be contextualized within this larger environmental and cultural framework.

The al-Hajjar mountains were an important source for copper and softstone, both of which were exploited by the early third millennium BCE and traded within southeastern Arabia and the broader Near East (Begemann et al., 2010; David, 1996; Harrower et al., 2016; Weeks, 2003).

The eastern foothills of the al-Hajjar mountains end at the Batinah coast, a comparatively flat stretch of fertile land between the mountains and the Gulf of Oman, and to the west of the mountains are alluvial plains suitable for agriculture.

Southeastern Arabia is arid, often receiving less than 100 mm of annual rainfall.

Much of this rain comes in only a handful of storms each year, making it impossible to depend even on this meager level of precipitation for agriculture (Magee, 2007, 84; Parker and Goudie, 2008; Preston et al., 2012).

However, the storms recharged groundwater, which was exploited by wells that would have supported agriculture as early as the start of the third millennium in the plains to the west of the al-Hajjar mountains (Charbonnier, 2015; Cleuziou, 2009).

Falaj irrigation, which developed in the early first millennium BCE (Al-Tikriti, 2002, 2010), greatly expanded the exploitation of groundwater and increased agricultural productivity.

PARAGRAPH

Along the west coast, lenses of fresh water form above the denser saline waters (Magee, 2007, 84).

Excavations at Tell Abraq have identified wells that accessed these lenses.

One of these wells has been associated with a late third millennium occupation (Potts, 1993, 118), but the possibility remains that the well in question descended from a later period.

A second well contained pottery from the early second millennium (Magee et al., 2017, 216).

Given the extent of late third millennium occupation at Tell Abraq, it is reasonable to expect that water was accessible at this time, if not from the wells documented through excavation then possibly an additional well still to be located.

The freshwater along the coast would have supported subsistence strategies that combined marine resource exploitation and trade to other ports in the Persian Gulf with agriculture, animal husbandry, and hunting (Händel, 2009; Magee et al., 2009, 2017; Uerpmann, 2001).

PARAGRAPH

The desert region where Saruq al-Hadid was located had access to pools of water that collect after heavy rains above the gypsum.

Winter rainfall is likely to have been greater in the second millennium BCE (Parker et al., 2006), and so it may be that these pools were more common.

The discovery of several wells at Saruq al-Hadid, tentatively dated to the mid-second millennium BCE (Ihde, 2017), point to accessible groundwater in addition to these pools.

While water availability could not support agriculture in the desert (Weeks et al., 2018), plants suitable for grazing by domestic herd animals and wild game were readily available.

Both Saruq al-Hadid and the nearby campsite of al-Ashoosh clearly demonstrate that people and herds of animals exploited this region in the Bronze Age, long after the well-documented Neolithic use of the area during the Holocene Climatic Optimum (Casana et al., 2009; Contreras et al., 2016; Herrmann et al., 2012; Weeks et al., 2017).

PARAGRAPH

Roughly 50 km separate Saruq al-Hadid from the alluvial plains and mountains to the east and the coastal lagoon systems to the west.

Evidence such as fish remains at Saruq al-Hadid (Weeks et al., 2017) and pottery from the inland plains found at coastal sites (Magee, 2011), among other artifactual indicators, suggest that these environmental zones were highly interconnected.

The domestication of the dromedary camel, which had certainly occurred by the close of the second millennium BCE (Almathen et al., 2016; Uerpmann and Uerpmann, 2002), made the transportation of goods between these zones easier and would have amplified this interconnectivity (Magee, 2007).

SECTION

The site of Saruq al-Hadid

SECTION

The stratigraphy

PARAGRAPH

Saruq al-Hadid is distinguished from the surrounding sand dunes by a deflation surface incorporating a large volume of copper slag and covering more than 2 ha.

Excavations at the site have been ongoing since 2003 as joint collaborations between the government of Dubai and several international teams (Casana et al., 2009; Contreras Rodrigo et al., 2017; Herrmann et al., 2012; Al-Khraysheh and Nashef, 2007; Weeks et al., 2017).

Archaeological investigations identified concentrations of artifacts distributed over an area measuring more than 1 km2 that were between, within, and buried by sand dunes.

Evidence for human activity does not appear to have occurred with the same intensity, or at least was not preserved to the same degree, across this entire area.

In some locations, no sediment is above the artifacts resting directly on gypsum bedrock, while in other parts of the site sand and artifacts form varying stratigraphic layers for depths of up to 6 m.

It is in these latter parts where excavations were able to isolate five distinct horizons of human occupation at the site.

PARAGRAPH

The earliest of these, Horizon V, consists of postholes, channels, and hearths cut into the gypsum bedrock and in the dunes immediately above it.

Recovered from among these features were scatters of lithics and pottery.

Associated radiocarbon samples range from the last century of the third millennium BCE to the eighteenth century BCE (Weeks et al., 2017, Fig. 6), and ceramic comparanda suggest that this layer coincided with the end of the Umm an-Nar period (c. 2500–2000 BCE) and start of the Wadi Suq period (c. 2000–1600 BCE).

Horizon IV is a densely packed concentration of bone with some hearth features and pottery, interspersed with layers of sterile sand.

The only evidence for a standing feature, a rectangular stone structure measuring roughly 0.5 m × 0.7 m × 0.3 m (Weeks et al., 2017, 34–5), is from Horizon IV.

Radiocarbon dates and ceramic comparanda date Horizon IV to c. 1800–1400 BCE, which spans the Wadi Suq period and the Late Bronze Age (c. 1600–1300 BCE).

Resting atop this dense concentration of bone is Horizon III, a layer containing metal objects, soft stone, and ceramics.

Found among the artifacts of Horizon III were a number of unworked sandstone fragments but no preserved walls.

The pottery from Horizon III belongs to the Late Bronze Age and the Iron Age I period (c. 1300–1000 BCE), corresponding with the radiocarbon dates from this layer.

Horizon II is a layer of windblown sand varying in depth from 1.3–3.0 m within which are very high concentrations of pottery, metal, worked bone, and soft stone that point to episodic activity as the sands accumulated.

Ceramic comparanda place this layer in the Iron Age II (c. 1000–600 BCE), with numerous associated radiocarbon dates indicating occupation largely from 1000 to 800 BCE.

The copper slag that led to the initial discovery of the site forms the major material component of Horizon I. Mixed among the slag are furnace and crucible fragments from metal working as well as finished and unfinished metal artifacts and pottery.

Artifactual remains, radiocarbon assays, and thermoluminescence results point to a highly deflated deposit incorporating the residues of activity over a very long time span from the Iron Age II period to the late pre-Islamic period (c. 300 BCE–600 CE) and the early Islamic period (c. 800–1100 CE).

SECTION

The pottery

PARAGRAPH

There is considerable variation in the ceramics throughout all five horizons.

The majority of the material divides into seven macroscopically defined fabric groups (Fabrics A–G) that occur in vessel shapes found commonly within southeastern Arabia (Table 1; Fig. 4).

It is these fabric groups that are the focus of the analysis as they have the potential to shed light on the extent to which the temporary site of Saruq al-Hadid was integrated into the wider regional network of both sedentary and temporary settlements.

Aside from these seven major fabric groups, additional fabrics include possible imports from southern Iraq and Iran, unique fabrics that defy classification, technical ceramics associated with copper production, and later fabrics that post-date the Iron Age.

PARAGRAPH

Found in Horizons V, IV, and III is a red sandy fabric, termed Fabric A, which has no visible inclusions.

Traces of production marks indicate that Fabric A was fabricated on a potters' wheel or tournette.

This fabric compares favorably with the sandy red ware documented at Hili 8 where it dominates the assemblages dating to the middle of the third millennium (Cleuziou, 1989b, 57–59; Méry, 2000, 125–126).

Fabric A dates to the Umm an-Nar period, which is consistent with its occurrence in Horizon V.

There is an absence of stratified sites that span the late third and early second millennia BCE, and so it cannot be ruled out that the production of this particular fabric continued into the early second millennium.

At the same time, the appearance of this earlier pottery in Horizons IV and III, which date firmly to the second millennium, may be residual.

The abundance of sandy red ware at Hili has led Méry (2000, 160–163) to posit a production locale in the vicinity of the al-Ain oasis.

Every rim fragment of Fabric A came from an open vessel.

PARAGRAPH

Fabric B is defined by an even firing, small inclusions of calcium carbonate, and traces of production on a potters' wheel or tournette.

All examples of Fabric B occur as small open vessels, often with painted wavy lines decorating the exterior.

This particular type of pottery is diagnostic of the Wadi Suq period and can be found throughout the region (Méry, 2000, 253–257).

Preliminary petrographic study of the Wadi Suq pottery from Hili found that some of this material was the result of the same production locale as the earlier sandy red ware but the majority of the analyzed samples are the result of a different combination of raw materials that Méry (2000, 255–7) suggests may have been located within the Wadi Jizzi to the east of Hili.

PARAGRAPH

Although at no point common, Fabric C occurs in Horizons V-II.

Characteristic of Fabric C is a buff to orange exterior with grey core.

Inclusions vary but may include mineral temper as well as calcareous grits.

The sherds from Fabric C are highly fragmentary but there is evidence for the use of a potters' wheel or tournette for some vessels while several bowls were entirely handmade.

Fabric C is identical to fabric 1 from Tell Abraq, which is common in the Late Bronze Age deposits and may be a continuation of early ceramic traditions from the Wadi Suq period (Magee et al., 2017, 228–229).

PARAGRAPH

Fabric D is found throughout the stratigraphic sequence at Saruq al-Hadid.

This fabric is handmade with large angular inclusions of stone and grog.

The core is incompletely oxidized and the interior and exterior surfaces often show traces of burning that may be either from the use of the vessel or possibly from proximity to fuel during the firing process.

Fabric D corresponds with what has been termed handmade coarse ware (Magee, 2011), ez ware (Velde, 1992, 100–101), mineral temper ware (Fritz, 2009, Table 8), and fabric 2 at Tell Abraq (Magee et al., 2017, Table 3).

Initially thought to be indicative of the Iron Age I in the northern Emirates (Magee, 1996), excavations at Tell Abraq have determined that this pottery appears earlier in the second millennium (Magee et al., 2017, 225–226).

Fabric D is used to produce open bowls with an average diameter of 25 cm.

PARAGRAPH

The dominant fabric in Horizons II and I is Fabric E, characterized by a sandy paste that is fired orange to buff.

Fabric E can be both very fine with only very small inclusions of red or black grit less than 1 mm in diameter or it can be coarse with the same grit occasionally exceeding 5 mm in diameter.

The finer versions of Fabric E compare favorably to Benoist's (1999, 61–63) sandy buff ware.

Wasters of sandy buff ware have been recovered from Hili 17 and compositional analysis indicates that the al-Ain area was one source for this material (Benoist and Méry, 2012; Magee et al., 1998).

Found alongside Fabric E is Fabric F, a red fabric that tends to be finer with similar inclusions of grit.

Fabric G, a red fabric that combines grit with inclusions of calcium carbonate, is most abundant in Horizon III and decreases slightly with the proliferation of Fabrics E and F in Horizon II.

Fabrics E, F, and G all occur in typical Iron Age II vessel shapes that range from smaller tableware to large storage jars.

PARAGRAPH

The pottery from Horizons III-I is unusual within southeastern Arabia because of the high number of snake applique vessels, a decorative motif typically associated with ritual practices of the Iron Age II period (Fig. 5) (Benoist, 2007, 2010; Karacic et al., 2017).

From these later horizons excavations have recovered numerous examples of cuprous objects that can be associated with ritual practices such as miniature bows, snake figurines, and anthropomorphic figurines (Contreras Rodrigo et al., 2017; Al-Khraysheh and Nashef, 2007; Nashef, 2010; Weeks et al., 2017).

Portable x-ray fluorescence determined that Fabrics E, F, and G, which were most commonly used to produce the snake applique pottery, came from more than one production locale, and these results lead to the tentative interpretation that the ritual practices evident in Horizons III-I may be related to pilgrimage (Karacic et al., 2017).

SECTION

Materials and methods

PARAGRAPH

Neutron activation analysis (NAA) on 100 samples of pottery taken from the seven different fabric groups from Saruq al-Hadid was undertaken at the University of Missouri Research Reactor (MURR), with the aim of assessing the compositional differences between these fabric groups and interpreting these results within a regional understanding of pottery production.

At MURR, trained technicians cleaned the ceramic samples of surface debris using a diamond-tipped Dremel burr.

The specimens were then ground into powder using an agate mortar and pestle and dried in a low-temperature oven at 110 °C.

Between specimens, the mortars and pestles used were cleaned with Alconox to avoid cross-contamination.

Two aliquots were weighed: 150 mg for short irradiation, sealed in high-purity polyethylene vials, and 200 mg sealed into high-purity quartz vials for long irradiation.

Ceramic samples and standard reference materials were irradiated via pneumatic tube system for 10 s at a flux of 8 × 1013 n cm−2 s−1.

Samples were each allowed to decay for 25 min, at which point gamma ray energies for elements that produce short-lived isotopes (Al, Ba, Ca, Dy, K, Mn, Na, Ti, and V) were measured by a HPGe for 12 m. Separate aliquots of each sample and standards were sealed in high purity quartz vials and irradiated for 24 h at 6 × 1013 n cm−2 s−1.

After a 7–10 day decay, the radioactive samples were measured for 2000 s to obtain data on medium-lived isotopes (As, La, Lu, Nd, Sm, U, and Yb), and again after 2–3 weeks for 8200 s to measure for long-lived elements (Ce, Co, Cr, Cs, Eu, Fe, Hf, Ni, Rb, Sb, Sc, Sr, Ta, Tb, Th, Zn, and Zr).

The spectral data were calculated to elemental concentrations using in-house software, and calibrated to NIST standard reference materials.

NIST standard reference materials and quality control samples (SRM 1633b Fly Ash, 688 Basalt, and Ohio Red Clay) were analyzed with each batch.

PARAGRAPH

The geochemical data generated by NAA were examined through established analytical conventions that combine principal component analysis, Euclidean cluster analysis, Mahalanobis distance, and bivariate plots using the GAUSS 8.0 software developed by MURR (Glascock and Neff, 2003; Glascock et al., 2004).

Sand and calcium carbonates are common inclusions in the pottery of southeastern Arabia, either intentionally added by the potter or occurring naturally in the local clays.

Both inclusions have the potential to decrease the apparent concentrations of the other measured elements.

This occurs because the geochemical data are reported in a fixed-sum matrix as either parts per million or weight percent.

The addition of a temper with a particularly high concentration of elements such as Si or Ca will effectively dilute other elements that may be indicative of clay sources.

This is a well-documented challenge in the geochemical analysis of ceramics (Boulanger and Glascock, 2015; Cogswell et al., 1998; Neff et al., 1989; Perlman and Asaro, 1971, 190–191; Sterba et al., 2009).

The solution adopted in this research is to normalize the data by dividing the quantitative results by Sc, selected specifically because of its resistance to alteration during weathering (Dias and Prudêncio, 2008; Grave et al., 2014).

Once the data were normalized, Ca was removed.

Because Sr is a known chemical substitute for Ca, it was also excluded from further analysis.

The statistical analysis proceeded solely according to geochemical concentrations and is, therefore, independent of the archaeological data.

SECTION

Results

PARAGRAPH

Statistical analysis identified three distinct geochemical groups labelled Group 1, Group 2, and Group 3 (Fig. 6; Tables 2, 3).

Only Fabric D did not have at least one sample classified as Group 1.

Group 1 is characterized by elevated levels of Cr, Co, Mn, and Fe.

The majority of samples from Fabric E belong to Group 2 as do several samples from Fabrics A and F. High levels of La, Nd, Ce, Rb, Zr, Al, K, and Ti distinguish Group 2 from the other samples.

The only fabric included in Group 3 is Fabric D, and this group has particularly low concentrations of La, Fe, K, and Mn.

Of the 100 ceramics analyzed, 17 could not be placed with confidence into one of the geochemical groups.

This is not atypical for geochemical analysis, where upwards of 20% of samples in some studies are without a statistically-defined geochemical group (e.g. Wallis et al., 2010).

A number of explanations may account for the samples without a group: they may be the product of geochemical groups that are underrepresented in this study and, therefore, remain to be statistically verified; one of the currently defined groups may have greater geochemical variation than can be determined with the given sample numbers; and contamination, however unlikely, is always a possibility during the course of sampling or analysis.

PARAGRAPH

A more detailed examination of Group 1 suggests that some samples have a higher level of Ni than the larger group (Fig. 7).

This sub-group, labelled Group 1.1, does not have a strong correlation with any one macroscopically identified fabric and includes examples of Fabrics B, E, F, and G.

It may be that Group 1.1 represents a distinct production locale; however, the limited number of samples that can confidently be classified as Group 1.1 is insufficient for such conclusions to be drawn at this stage.

PARAGRAPH

Likewise, two sub-groups can be identified within Group 2 (Figs. 8, 9).

A bivariate plot of Cr/Sc and La/Sc distinguishes Group 2.1 from the larger Group 2 while higher levels of Fe characterize Group 2.2.

There is considerable overlap across the majority of the elements measured by NAA, making it impossible to confidently classify Groups 2.1 and 2.2 as the products of independent production locales.

However, there are archaeologically observed differences that correspond to these sub-groups.

Group 2.1 consists primarily of a very fine version of Fabric E.

The three examples of Fabric A and four examples of Fabric F that were classified as Group 2 together form sub-group 2.2 and may also belong to a different production locale.

It is possible that future analysis of samples from Fabrics A, E, and F will allow for more robust statistical definitions of sub-groups 2.1 and 2.2 as distinct from Group 2.

PARAGRAPH

Both Groups 1 and 2 include fabrics that indicate a possible source in the vicinity of the al-Ain oasis.

Fabric E, which forms the majority of the samples in Group 2, is macroscopically similar to the sandy buff ware that is known to have been produced at Hili 17 and to have a geochemistry consistent with the geology in the vicinity of the al-Ain oasis (Magee et al., 1998).

Group 1 includes Fabrics A and B, which find parallels to sandy red ware and Méry's Wadi Suq céramique semi-fine, both of which are thought to have been produced near the al-Ain oasis.

However, neither group matches the geochemical signatures identified as characteristic of Méry's sandy red ware from Hili.

The Smithsonian conducted NAA on twenty-six examples of sandy red ware from Hili (Méry, 2000, Tables 42 and 43).

A direct comparison between the NAA results from this study and the data collected at the Smithsonian is complicated by the fact that the two facilities measure different suites of elements against different standard reference materials (Hein et al., 2002; Karacic et al., 2016).

Interlaboratory conversions developed by MURR were applied to the data collected at the Smithsonian (Glascock personal communication 2018), and the datasets were compared for the following elements: As, Ba, Ca, Ce, Co, Cr, Cs, Eu, Fe, Hf, K, La, Lu, Na, Rb, Sb, Sc, Sm, Sr, Ta, Tb, Th, U, Yb, and Zn.

For the reasons previously outlined, the data were normalized by Sc and then Ca and Sr were removed from analysis.

The resulting analysis indicates considerable compositional variation between the pottery from Hili, Group 1, and Group 2 (Fig. 10).

These differences leave open the geographic location for the production of Groups 1 and 2.

PARAGRAPH

Group 3 consists entirely of Fabric D and there are no examples of Fabric D that belong to either Group 1 or Group 2.

This strong positive correlation indicates that Fabric D is the product of a completely different combination of raw materials than the other pottery.

A graph of the coefficients of variance clearly demonstrates that Group 3 is the most geochemically heterogeneous group (Fig. 11), suggesting a greater degree of variation in the combination of raw materials used to produce Fabric D.

PARAGRAPH

The source for Fabric D, identical to what Magee has termed handmade coarse ware, is an unresolved question.

Magee (2011) has argued for Wadi Haqil as the possible source for the handmade coarse ware found at Muweilah.

He applied inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry to handmade coarse ware and sandy buff ware, which corresponds with Fabric E. Magee's results identified clear differences in the geochemistry of the two pottery types.

In particular, he identified higher levels of K and Rb for the handmade coarse ware as evidence of an acidic igneous origin consistent with the Aruma rock formation at the northern end of the peninsula.

This contrasted with the sandy buff ware, comparable to Fabric E, which Magee determined to have elevated levels of Ca, Cr, Mg, Na, and Ni that point to the mafic Semail Ophiolite as the source.

Magee added to his analysis an Islamic period sherd likely to have been produced in Wadi Haqil and it consistently plotted with the handmade coarse ware.

These lines of evidence led Magee to argue for a northern origin for the handmade coarse ware included in his study.

However, Group 3 has lower K and Rb than Groups 1 and 2 (Table 2), raising the possibility that the handmade coarse ware consumed at Saruq al-Hadid was the result of a different production locale than those specimens analyzed by Magee and found at the site of Muweilah.

SECTION

Discussion and conclusions

PARAGRAPH

The results of the NAA point to both change and continuity at Saruq al-Hadid across the Bronze Age to the Iron Age transition.

Group 1 is associated with the fabrics that are most common in the earlier Bronze Age levels while Group 2 consists largely of Fabric E, which becomes the dominant fabric in early Iron Age Horizon II.

This chronological difference indicates a change in the production locales at the end of the second millennium or the start of the first.

The stratigraphic evidence indicates that this shift was neither sudden nor complete.

Rather, the evidence points to a decrease in the fabrics associated with Group 1 beginning in Horizon III while fabrics associated with Group 2 appear throughout the sequence and become more common in Horizon II.

Concomitant to this shift in production locales are significant changes in the types of pottery consumed.

Ritual pottery formed less than 5% of the diagnostics from Horizons V and IV, increasing to 26% for Horizon III.

Less than 3% of the assemblages for Horizons V-III were closed vessels, and this number increased to over 20% for the final levels.

Significant differences are apparent in other categories of material remains as well.

While copper-base artifacts were present but relatively uncommon in Bronze Age horizons, thousands of copper-base artifacts were recovered from the early Iron Age deposits of Horizon II (Weeks et al., 2017; Weeks et al., 2018).

Newly present at Saruq al-Hadid in Horizon II are ferrous artifacts, gold, and extensive evidence of metal working that includes copper smelting slag, raw copper, copper ingots, and copper scrap (Weeks et al., 2017; Weeks et al., 2018).

These changes documented in Horizons III and II date to the end of the second millennium BCE and the start of the first.

PARAGRAPH

The shift to the production locale of Group 2, when contextualized alongside the concurrent increase in metal artifacts, reflects a broadening of the material and economic activities of Saruq al-Hadid's occupants, and this may have been made possible through the use of the camel as a beast of burden.

It is at the end of the second millennium that the earliest evidence for the domestication of the dromedary camel appears in southeastern Arabia (Almathen et al., 2016; Uerpmann and Uerpmann, 2002).

The domesticated camel provided a dependable source of milk, meat, and transportation.

The earliest evidence for the camel as a beast of burden comes from ceramic figurines found at Tell Abraq (Magee et al., 2017, 42) and Muweilah (Magee, 2015) that clearly depict a burden placed on the back of a dromedary camel and date to the tenth century.

Camel bones have been found in every horizon at Saruq al-Hadid.

It remains to be determined if these camels were wild and hunted, domesticated and herded, or a combination of the two (Roberts et al., 2018).

In all possible scenarios, the people gathering at Saruq al-Hadid must have been intimately familiar with the camel.

When the camel became a beast of burden the people gathering at Saruq al-Hadid were sufficiently knowledgeable, having interacted with the camel for generations, to benefit from the new opportunities presented by this old resource.

This is not to say that the domestication of the camel was the raison d'être for occupation at Saruq al-Hadid, as seems to have been the case for Muweilah (Magee, 2007).

Evidence from throughout the region, however, does point to an increase in connectivity between the various environmental zones of southeastern Arabia at the start of the first millennium BCE (Magee, 2011), and there can be little doubt, first, that the camel facilitated such interactions and, second, that those people gathering at Saruq al-Hadid were well situated to capitalize on these new opportunities.

PARAGRAPH

In contrast to the changes observed for Groups 1 and 2, the analysis of Fabric D, which occurred in all five horizons, points to continuity.

The coarseness of Fabric D and its production methods clearly distinguish this pottery as belonging to a different technological tradition from all other pottery found at Saruq al-Hadid.

It is, for this reason, not surprising that Fabric D belongs to a different production locale.

Such continuity is only possible with the maintenance of the exchange networks through which Fabric D circulated and the persistence of those practices that required this particular type of pottery.

What this function may have been is, unfortunately, yet to be determined.

One possibility is that the open bowls of Fabric D were used for cooking, a point supported by traces of burning on the surface, but these may also be the result of uneven firing conditions during the initial production of the vessels.

It should also be noted that Fabric D occurred in pedestalled bowls with snake applique, which are believed to have been used in ritual practices (Benoist, 2007, 2010; Karacic et al., 2017).

Fabric D is indicative of a degree of continuity in economic practice and departs from the larger narrative of prehistoric southeastern Arabia, which emphasizes how changes introduced by the domestication of the camel and falaj irrigation led to a reordering of economic practice at the start of the first millennium BCE.

PARAGRAPH

It is significant that the pottery points to both change and continuity at this persistent temporary place.

Saruq al-Hadid was a point of aggregation for over a millennium.

Environmental factors, such as the episodic availability of water and vegetation, made Saruq al-Hadid a suitable location for the hunting of wild camel, gazelle, and oryx and for the keeping of herds, which by the early Iron Age took place alongside socially-constitutive ritual activities of significant scale (Weeks et al., 2018).

While many questions remain about the transition from the second to the first millennia BCE in southeastern Arabia, the continuity of Fabric D at Saruq al-Hadid indicates that groups periodically gathering at the site maintained some economic networks following the sudden proliferation of settlements in the early Iron Age.

At the same time, these groups were not isolated from change; the shift in pottery consumption from Group 1 to Group 2 was likely tied to larger regional changes impacted by the use of the camel as a beast of burden.

PARAGRAPH

Temporary sites, and their inhabitants, are typically cast as peripheral to the sedentary settlements of the ancient Near East.

Although this may sometimes be true in a geographical sense, there is no good reason to conflate spatial remoteness with social liminality.

A broad range of archaeological evidence challenges conceptions of a strict divide between sedentary and mobile individuals, groups, and lifeways in late prehistoric southeastern Arabia (Weeks et al., 2018).

The ceramic evidence from Saruq al-Hadid, including both typological and material studies, strongly reinforces this impression and indicates that the peoples gathering at the site were tightly integrated into – and thus important for understanding – the social and economic fabric of southeastern Arabia.

A better comprehension of this society depends on the integration of evidence from all components of the settlement system.

PARAGRAPH

Significantly, the methodology employed in this study can be fruitfully applied to archaeological settlement systems comprising both temporary and sedentary sites, not just in southeastern Arabia but more broadly across the ancient Near East and globally.

Robust compositional and typological analyses of pottery from temporary sites can lead to insights into the social and economic activities that connected such sites to their sedentary neighbours.

Ceramic production and provenance studies are particularly powerful when integrated with a broad spectrum of new and traditional archaeological approaches, including typological and archaeometric studies of other categories of inorganic material remains, and archaeobotanical and zooarchaeological analyses of associated organic materials.