10.1016/j.jhep.2018.05.025

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Karnofsky performance status before and after liver transplantation predicts graft and patient survival

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

The Karnofsky performance status (KPS) has been used for almost 70 years in clinical practice as a subjective ‘eyeball’ assessment of the overall performance status of patients.

The KPS scores, administered by the provider or support staff, assign scores to patients on a scale of 0–100%, in increments of 10, where 100% is normal activity and 0% is dead.1

It is widely used in general oncology practice as a prognostic predictor and also for the selection of patients in clinical trials.4–10

The inter-observer reliability, validity and reproducibility of KPS scores in multiple clinical settings have shown to be excellent.2,10,11

Recently, the KPS was shown to be a useful tool for predicting survival in patients admitted to hospitals with complications of cirrhosis and was shown to be a predictor of transplant waitlist mortality.12,13

PARAGRAPH

The model for end-stage liver disease (MELD) scores is objective, but does not incorporate many variables that may predict outcomes before and after liver transplantation including malnutrition or morbid obesity, mobility and performance status.

Despite its subjectivity, KPS scores reflect the overall assessment of a patient’s performance status that may include some of the subjective tools that are difficult to quantify in an objective manner.2

Recently, there have been attempts to develop objective tools, such as frailty index, six-minute walk distance and sarcopenia, to assess patients with liver diseases, but their utility in epidemiological studies remain unknown.14–18

PARAGRAPH

The Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status score, also widely used in cancer research, was found to be associated with 90-day post-LT survival in a study based on the United Kingdom and Ireland transplant registry.19

To our knowledge, there have been no systematic studies exploring the utility of KPS before and after LT in predicting post-LT outcomes.

The objective of our study was to determine whether KPS scores before and after LT independently predicted post-LT outcomes in an unselected patient population.

SECTION

Patients and methods

PARAGRAPH

We included patients listed for LT with the United Network for Organ Sharing (UNOS) between January 1, 2006 and September 30, 2016.

The start date of January 1, 2006 was selected as KPS scores were consistently collected since 2006.

Prior to 2006, for most patients, performance status was categorized into three categories, whereas the KPS scores are entered as an 11-point scale ranging between 0% and 100%.

Our preliminary analysis suggested that combining these two variables into a single performance status measurement would introduce a bias, and hence we limited our analysis for those who were listed from January 1, 2006.

We excluded patients younger than 18 years old, those listed for multiple organ transplantation or re-transplantation, those on life support or mechanical ventilation, and those with missing KPS scores (Flow Chart, Fig. 1).

Based on KPS scores at the time of transplantation, patients were stratified into three groups: low (KPS scores 10–40%; unable to care for self and requires substantial assistance), intermediate (KPS scores 50–70%; unable to work and requires varying assistance) and high KPS (KPS scores 80–100%; able to work and no assistance required).2

We collected KPS scores at the time of listing, at the time of transplant and at different intervals while awaiting LT and after LT for up to five years.

We assessed differences in KPS at the time of listing and at LT; similarly, we assessed the differences in KPS at the time of LT and follow-up.

PARAGRAPH

We collected data including age, sex, ethnicity, body mass index (BMI), serum creatinine, presence of diabetes mellitus, MELD score, presence of hepatic encephalopathy, cause of liver disease and donor risk index (DRI).

The DRI was estimated according to a method proposed by Feng et al.20 We estimated graft and patient survival after censoring patients at the time of re-transplantation or death based on KPS scores at the time of transplant.

We also explored the survival differences based on post-LT changes (between 3–12 months) in KPS scores.

Additionally, we examined the pre- and post-LT variables that could predict a non-improvement in KPS after the liver transplant.

SECTION

Statistical methods

PARAGRAPH

The baseline characteristics at the time of transplant were compared using t tests for continuous variables and Chi-squared tests for categorical variables.

The post-transplant graft and patient survival probabilities were estimated using Kaplan-Meier survival analysis; the log-rank test was used to examine differences in survival probabilities between the three groups.

The strength of the associations with the risk factors including demographic, clinical and graft quality characteristics was estimated via hazard ratios using Cox proportional hazard regressions.

For this analysis, those variables that were significant at p ≤0.1 by univariate analysis were included into a multivariate model.

The variables that we included in the univariate analysis were age, gender, race, morbid obesity (BMI >40), MELD scores, stage 3–4 encephalopathy, etiology of liver disease, DRI, transplant center volume and KPS scores.

The relative risk of graft and patient failure were adjusted for the differences in distributions of the risk factors between the three groups and are expressed as hazard ratios (HRs) with 95% confidence intervals.

PARAGRAPH

For changes in KPS score from listing to LT and following LT, up to five years, we have summarized the results as descriptive statistics and histograms.

The survival probabilities based on improvement in KPS were estimated by Kaplan-Meier estimates for three groups (defined as low, intermediate and high based on KPS at the time of LT) separately.

For this analysis, KPS scores for the first three months of LT were excluded as patients are in the recovery phase after surgery and only those KPS scores assessed between 3–12 months were used to stratify the patients.

The criteria of improvement differed among three groups.

For patients with a high KPS score at transplant (80–100%), patients were stratified into two groups: a decrease of KPS scores by at least 10% or an improvement by ≥0%.

Those with an intermediate KPS score at transplant (50–70%) were stratified into three groups: no improvement (≤0%), improvement by 10–20% or ≥30%.

Patients with a low KPS score at transplant (≤40%) were stratified into four groups: no improvement (≤0%), improvement by 10–40%, 50–70% or ≥80%.

These differences in stratification were to accommodate for the plausible differences in improvement/worsening of KPS scores within the three groups.

To identify pre- and post-LT variables that could potentially predict a decline or lack of improvement in KPS after LT, we used logistic regression with a forward stepwise model.

SECTION

Results

PARAGRAPH

During the study period, 57,885 patients were listed for LT (after excluding 5,068 listed for more than one organ), and of these we excluded 6,582 (3,726 patients on life support, 2,684 on ventilator, 172 missing data on life support) patients as it was not possible to reliably assess KPS score and 886 because of missing data on KPS scores.

Our final sample size was 50,417 individuals, with follow-up data for up to 10 years.

Based on KPS scores at the time of LT, there were 15,103 with low scores, 22,183 with intermediate scores and 13,131 with high scores (Fig. 1).

PARAGRAPH

The demographic and clinical characteristics are shown (Table 1).

The low KPS score group comprised relatively younger patients and a higher proportion of women and Hispanics.

Morbid obesity, prevalence of dialysis and stage 3–4 hepatic encephalopathy were more common in those with low KPS scores.

Similarly, serum creatinine and MELD scores were higher and serum albumin was lower in the low KPS score group.

There were fewer patients with hepatocellular carcinoma in the low KPS group.

PARAGRAPH

To compare KPS at listing and LT, we excluded 1,235 patients who had functional status assessed by an old scoring system (3 categories) and 1,389 who had missing KPS scores at listing.

Among the 47,793 evaluable patients, KPS scores remained unchanged in 19%, improved in few and decreased in most during the waiting period (Fig. 2A).

The KPS was assessed at the time of listing and transplantation for all patients (only one observation at each time point), and the median time between the assessments was 97 (22; 274) days.

The decline in KPS worsened with longer duration on the waiting list (Table S2).

For post-LT follow-up, we excluded KPS that was assessed within three months of LT (n = 5,853).

PARAGRAPH

We had complete post-LT data on 42,339 patients at one year and 30,291 at two years.

As shown (Fig. 2B), the KPS score improved in more than 90% of patients after LT (Fig. 2B).

The KPS scores were assessed multiple times after LT; for our study we included KPS assessment between 3–12 months after LT. The median interval between LT and follow-up KPS assessment was 223 (186–265 IQR) days.

While 22,334 patients only had KPS assessment, 19,947 had two KPS scores.

A minority of LT recipients (n = 58) had three or more.

When more than one KPS score was available between 3–12 months, the average score was calculated.

The median improvement at one year was 20% (mean 23 ± 29%), and there was no further improvement after that (Table S3).

PARAGRAPH

The graft and patient survival showed worsening survival probabilities in those with intermediate and low KPS score groups (Fig. 3A, B).

The maximum difference in patient survival was less than 6% at every time interval after LT in the low KPS score group compared to the high KPS score group (Table S1).

Multivariate analysis, after adjusting for other confounders, showed that poor performance status at the time of transplant was associated with lower graft and patient survival in those with intermediate and low KPS scores (Table 2 and Table S4).

The HRs for graft failure were 1.17 (1.12–1.22, p <0.01) for the intermediate group and 1.38 (1.31–1.46, p <0.01) for the low group.

Similarly, HRs for patient failure were 1.18 (1.13–1.24, p <0.01) for the intermediate group and 1.43 (1.35–1.52, p <0.01) for the low group.

Other independent negative predictors of graft and patient survival were older age, presence of hepatic encephalopathy, and DRI.

The etiology of liver disease was also an independent predictor.

Hispanics and Asians had a better survival and Blacks had poorer survival when compared to Whites.

The effect of transplant center was analyzed in two different ways in this study: by grouping based on the number of LT performed per year (<20, 20–50 and >50 per year) or random center effect.

Both analyses showed that the transplant center had no impact on our graft or patient survival outcomes (Tables S5–8).

PARAGRAPH

We further analyzed survival based on changes in KPS scores after LT. Patient survival based on changes in KPS score in low, intermediate and high groups are shown (Fig. 4).

The one-year survival was only 33% in those with no improvement in KPS scores between 3–12 months after LT compared to 91% to 99% in those who had improved scores (Fig. 4A, Table 3).

Similarly, in the intermediate group, one-year survival was 75% in those without improvement compared to 98% to 99% in those with improvement (Fig. 4B, Table 4).

Even in the high KPS score group, there was a difference in survival, with one-year survival rates of 86% in those with a decrease in KPS score and 99% in those with no change or an improvement in KPS score (Fig. 4C, Table 3).

PARAGRAPH

Since the KPS scores after LT had a major impact in the low KPS group, we examined this group in more detail to identify potential risk factors that could predict the non-improvement in KPS after LT (Table 4).

The patients that showed no improvement (n = 608) in KPS were older, and had lower international normalized ratio, creatinine, bilirubin, albumin and MELD scores; this group also had a higher proportion of patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus, hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and hepatitis C virus (HCV).

In addition, moderate ascites, dialysis, primary biliary cholangitis, primary sclerosing cholangitis and alcoholic cirrhosis were less common in the group that showed no improvement in KPS after LT. The interval between listing and transplantation was also higher in those who did not improve, and majority of these patients (75.5%) had their LT in centers that performed more than 50 transplants/year (p = 0.0003).

PARAGRAPH

To identify independent risk factors for non-improvement in KPS after LT, we performed a logistic regression (forward selection) for the group with low KPS that did not show an improvement in KPS after LT, compared to those with an improvement of 50% or more (Table S9).

We included all confounding risk factors and found that older age (odds ratio [OR] 1.02; 95% CI 1.01–1.03; p <0.0001), total bilirubin <12 mg/dl at LT (OR 1.27; CI 1.02–1.59; p = 0.03), MELD less than 30 (OR 1.28; CI 1.03–1.59; p = 0.02), serum albumin at LT (OR 0.84; CI 0.75–0.95; p = 0.005), presence of HCV (OR 1.5; CI 1.22–1.84; p = 0.0001) or HCC (OR 1.46; CI 1.16–1.83; p = 0.0001), and acute rejection episodes between LT and discharge from the hospital (OR 1.63; CI 1.14–2.35; p = 0.008) were associated with a higher probability of having no improvement in KPS after LT. These findings may suggest that the lack of improvement in KPS is multifactorial and could not be explained by more severe liver disease.

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

In this study, we have shown a lower post-LT survival in patients with intermediate and low KPS scores when compared to those with high KPS scores.

We also showed that KPS scores are independent predictors of graft and patient survival after LT after adjusting for other confounders.

The improvement in KPS scores after LT reached a plateau at one year and thereafter there was no significant improvement.

Those who did not demonstrate significant improvement in KPS scores after LT had worse outcomes, and this was most obvious in the low KPS group.

PARAGRAPH

The interaction between performance status, as assessed by any subjective tools, and outcomes is very complex and has been debated in medical literature in detail before.2–9

Despite its subjectivity, performance status has been shown to be predictor of survival in many conditions including in patients with cirrhosis.2–9,12,13,21,22

We believe that the performance status adds another dimension to complete patient assessment in those with advanced cirrhosis.

The KPS is perhaps a reflection of the overall physical and mental status of the patients with cirrhosis that could not be quantified by objective parameters or disease severity indices such as MELD and Child-Pugh scores.

In our study, KPS score was an independent predictor of graft and patient survival after adjusting for other known recipient and donor confounders.

Additionally, those who did not show significant improvement in KPS three months after LT had relatively poor outcomes.

These differences were most obvious in those who had poor KPS at the time of LT and in that group only 33% survived for one year if they had no improvement in KPS scores.

We may have underestimated the impact of KPS since we had excluded KPS scores assessed within three months of LT, as patients are considered to be recovering from surgery, and additionally, we had excluded those on life support (those on vasopressors for circulatory failure) or mechanical ventilation at the time of LT. Our data show that those who have low KPS at the time of LT and do not show any improvement in KPS three months after LT will have very poor survival outcomes.

PARAGRAPH

We tried to identify pre- and post-LT risk factors that could predict the lack of improvement in KPS after LT in the low KPS group.

Our analysis identified a few potential risk factors including older age, HCV, HCC and acute rejection episodes after LT, but counterintuitively, those who did not improve had less severe liver disease at the time of LT. We also examined the effect of transplant center volume and found no association.

Low serum albumin was associated with non-improvement in KPS after LT, and one could only speculate whether this was a reflection of sarcopenia.

It is possible that there are other potential post-LT complications and comorbidities that are not captured in the UNOS dataset that could explain the non-improvement and higher mortality in this group.

Future studies should explore the reasons, especially the role of comorbidities, for this observation in a prospective manner.

If modifiable reasons are identified, we may be able to intervene.

PARAGRAPH

Recently there has been a renewed interest in nutritional and functional status of patients with advanced liver diseases and those awaiting LT. Many potential tools have been proposed including assessment of sarcopenia, frailty index and six-minute walking distance, but it is not known whether these tools could be applied for epidemiological studies in potential LT recipients.14–18,23–26

The KPS scores, although subjective, can be easily administered and repeated many times without significant inter-observer variability.

Based on our study, we believe that KPS scores could be a useful tool for assessment of patients with advanced liver disease.3,4,12,13

This is further supported by a recent study of 954 hospitalized patients with cirrhosis where Tandon et al. showed that low KPS scores, assessed a week after hospital discharge, were associated with very high mortality; the mortality rates were 23%, 11% and 5% in the low, intermediate and high KPS score groups respectively.12

Moreover, three-month post discharge mortality could be predicted using a model that included KPS scores, age and MELD, and this model was better than MELD score alone in predicting three-month mortality.

In another elegant study using UNOS data, Orman et al. showed that low KPS scores were associated with a higher waitlist mortality after adjusting for other important confounders.13

As discussed earlier, a study from the United Kingdom and Ireland had shown that ECOG performance status scores were associated with 90-day post-LT survival.13

In that study that included 3,973 LT recipients, post-LT mortality increased from 5.3% in those with functional status 1 (able to carry out normal activity without restriction) to 24.8% in status 5 (completely reliant on nursing and medical care).

In another study that examined post-LT outcomes in older adults (≥50 years), poor pre-LT functional status was found to be associated with increased five-year mortality.27

Our study corroborates the above observations in a large unselected cohort of liver transplant recipients from the USA, and moreover shows that post-LT KPS scores also predict survival.

PARAGRAPH

One of the limitations of using KPS scores is the lack of evidence for reliability in patients with cirrhosis, where the presence of hepatic encephalopathy could influence KPS score assessment.

In multivariate analysis, we adjusted survival for hepatic encephalopathy, and yet KPS scores remained predictive of outcomes.

The reliability and reproducibility of KPS scores is well established in cancer literature.2–4

Moreover, we believe that the variability in the assessment is significantly diminished by grouping them into low, intermediate and high KPS scores.

Another limitation of our study is the lack of granularity in post-LT complications that could have a significant impact on KPS scores.

The consistency in assessment of KPS at defined intervals after LT is also a matter of concern.

Despite the above limitations, our observations suggest that KPS before and after LT is a useful predictor of survival.

PARAGRAPH

In conclusion, we have shown that low KPS scores are associated with worse outcomes after LT. Moreover, the absence of improvement on KPS scores is associated with poor survival especially in those with low KPS at the time of LT. Multidisciplinary approaches to improve performance status should be tested in a prospective manner to determine whether survival outcomes could be improved in LT candidates.

SECTION

Financial support

PARAGRAPH

The authors received no financial support to produce this manuscript.

SECTION

Conflict of interest

PARAGRAPH

The authors declare no conflicts of interest that pertain to this work.

PARAGRAPH

Please refer to the accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.

SECTION

Authors’ contributions

PARAGRAPH

Paul Thuluvath, Avesh Thuluvath and Yulia Savva contributed to the study concept, design, analysis, interpretation of data, drafting of manuscript.

PARAGRAPH

Yulia Savva did the statistical analysis.