10.1016/j.jhep.2018.07.025

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Hepatitis C virus reinfection after successful treatment with direct-acting antiviral therapy in a large population-based cohort

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) is associated with substantial morbidity and mortality, with >71 million people infected worldwide in 2015.1

In 2013, an estimated 700,000 deaths globally were attributed to HCV-related liver disease sequelae, namely cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma.2

Mortality is expected to increase as many individuals infected with HCV decades ago are aging and at high risk of chronic liver disease.3,4

With the introduction of highly effective and well-tolerated, all-oral direct-acting antiviral (DAA) therapies to treat chronic HCV infection,5,6 there has been renewed optimism regarding the ability to reduce the HCV disease burden and improve treatment outcomes in traditionally difficult to treat or cure populations.

This includes those co-infected with HIV,7 as well as people who inject drugs (PWID).8

PARAGRAPH

However, as HCV infection does not result in sterilizing immunity, individuals with ongoing risk activities remain vulnerable to reinfection following cure of their initial infection.9

Thus, reinfection after successful HCV treatment is an important public health issue and may impact efforts to control HCV transmission.10,11

PWID have been shown to be adherent to DAA treatments and can be effectively cured.12,13

However, concerns about reinfection risk impact on clinical decision-making regarding treatment of PWID14,15 who remain at risk of ongoing transmission.

Although, reinfection is a major concern in the DAA era, estimates of reinfection rates have been limited to the interferon era where treatment was largely restricted to motivated patients who would most likely benefit from therapy and reinfection rates were low.16–20

As DAAs have mitigated concerns related to compliance and adherence among PWID with ongoing injection behaviors, it has been postulated that reinfection rates with DAAs may be higher than during the interferon era.21

However, population-level data on reinfection following successful DAA treatment is scarce.11

PARAGRAPH

The objective of the current study was to assess HCV reinfection rates in a population-based cohort of HCV-infected individuals who initiated all-oral DAA therapy in British Columbia (BC), Canada, with an emphasis on those identified as PWID.

SECTION

Materials and methods

SECTION

Study population

PARAGRAPH

The Canadian province of BC has 4.8 million inhabitants.

All residents of BC are registered in the publicly funded Medical Services Plan that acts as a single-payer system and covers services provided by fee for service practitioners including general practices and private laboratories.

In 2016, an estimated 55,000 individuals were infected with HCV.

Until March 2017, public reimbursement for DAA treatment in BC was restricted to patients, including PWID, with at least moderate fibrosis (METAVIR stage ≥F2).

Between April 2017 and March 2018, access was expanded to include individuals with comorbidities such as HIV co-infection, diabetes, chronic kidney disease, or any other condition that could accelerate disease progression or necessitate early treatment.22

Starting March 2018, treatment is available to anyone with HCV regardless of fibrosis level.

PARAGRAPH

We utilized data from the British Columbia Hepatitis Testers Cohort (BC-HTC) which includes all individuals tested for HCV or HIV at the British Columbia Centre for Disease Control Public Health Laboratory (BCCDC-PHL) or who have been reported to public health as a confirmed case of HCV, HIV, hepatitis B or active tuberculosis (Table S1).

Using a unique personal health number, these data were linked with data on medical visits, hospitalization records, prescription drugs dispensed, and deaths.

All dispensed medications including HCV treatments and opioid-agonist therapy (OAT) are recorded in a central system called PharmaNet, included in the cohort.

The BCCDC-PHL is a centralized laboratory responsible for performing nearly all serologic testing (95%) and all confirmatory HCV RNA testing and HCV genotype testing in BC.

Further information about the BC-HTC, including methodology and data linkages have previously been published.23,24

PARAGRAPH

This analysis included all HCV-positive individuals successfully treated with an all-oral, interferon-free, DAA regimen and who had at least one valid HCV RNA measurement after achieving a sustained virologic response (SVR), see case definitions.

DAA therapy became available in BC on January 23rd, 2014.

HCV RNA laboratory results were available until April 22nd, 2018.

To ensure sufficient follow-up time to observe reinfection events, we included individuals who initiated treatment up until July 15th, 2017.

PARAGRAPH

Data linkage to establish the BC-HTC was performed under the auspices of the BCCDC’s public health mandate.

This study was reviewed and approved by the Behavioral Research Ethics Board at the University of British Columbia (H14-01649).

SECTION

Case definitions

PARAGRAPH

SVR was assessed using the first available HCV RNA measurement obtained between a minimum of 10 weeks to a maximum of 52 weeks after the end date of the last DAA prescription (i.e. SVR date).

Individuals with a negative or undetectable HCV RNA test were considered to have achieved SVR.

HCV RNA measurements were determined using the Abbott Real-Time Reverse Transcriptase PCR assay, with a lower limit of detection of 12 IU/ml.

We selected a minimum of 10 weeks to define SVR because in the clinical setting, physician appointments are not always scheduled at exactly 12 weeks.25

Only the first DAA treatment episode was considered in this analysis.

Reinfection was defined as a single positive HCV RNA test measured after SVR.

The date of reinfection was calculated as the midpoint between the last negative and first positive HCV RNA measurement.

Reinfections were considered to be persistent if they did not result in spontaneous clearance within six months of reinfection.18

PARAGRAPH

We assessed the following factors and their association with the risk of HCV reinfection: age at treatment initiation, birth cohort, sex, year of HCV diagnosis, HIV co-infection, injection drug use, OAT use, problematic alcohol use, and major mental illness.

PARAGRAPH

Injection drug use, problematic alcohol use, and major mental illness were defined based on international classification of diseases diagnostic or procedure codes, or fee item codes from a medical-services plan (medical visits), discharge abstract database (hospital admissions), or prescription database, as applicable (Table S2).

HIV diagnosis was based on serologic testing, per provincial guidelines, a record in the provincial HIV/AIDS reporting system, or three medical visits or an admission to hospital with an HIV-related diagnostic code.

Assessment of OAT was based on the record of dispensed prescriptions in the centralized prescription database, PharmaNet, which records all prescriptions dispensed in the province.

For the primary analysis, we utilized a more sensitive algorithm to identify PWID that included injection-related infections (>90% sensitivity) in addition to a medical visit or hospital admission for major drug-related diagnoses.26

More specific algorithms to identify PWID were explored in sensitivity analyses.

We further classified PWID based on when the latest definition-specific administrative record was observed.

Individuals with major drug or injection-related diagnoses in the last three years prior to SVR were considered to be recent PWID and those with diagnoses more than three years prior were considered to be former PWID.

OAT use was assessed only among former or recent PWID and was classified as daily (dispensed ≥84 times) or non-daily use (dispensed <84 times), in the 12 weeks prior to SVR.

This period was selected to correspond to OAT use since the end of therapy.

The presence or absence of all of these covariates were assessed prior to the SVR date.

SECTION

Statistical analysis

PARAGRAPH

We compared demographic and risk factor characteristics between included and excluded patients (i.e. those without post-SVR measurements) who achieved SVR.

Included individuals were followed from the SVR date until reinfection or their last negative HCV RNA measurement.

We calculated incidence rates per 100 person-years (PYs) of follow-up for overall and persistent HCV reinfections and corresponding 95% CIs, assuming a Poisson distribution.

Cumulative incidence curves compared the risk of reinfection by PWID status.

Poisson regression was used to model both age and sex-adjusted incidence rate ratios (IRRs) as well as fully-adjusted IRRs for overall and persistent reinfection risk factors.

All tests were two-sided at a significance level of 0.05.

All analyses were performed using SAS version 9.4 (Cary, NC, USA).

SECTION

Results

PARAGRAPH

Between January 23rd, 2014 and July 15th, 2017, 5,292 individuals treated with all-oral DAA therapy achieved SVR.

Of these individuals, 4,114 had at least one post-SVR HCV RNA measurement and were included in this analysis (Fig. 1).

Excluded individuals who also achieved SVR, but did not have a post-SVR HCV RNA measurement, were younger, more likely to be recent or former PWID or be on OAT, more likely to have a history of problematic alcohol consumption, and less likely to be HIV co-infected (Table S3).

PARAGRAPH

Overall, most individuals were male (65%), Caucasian (92%), were between the ages of 45 and 64 (median age 60 years, interquartile range [IQR] 54–64) and were PWID (65%), with either recent (21%) or former history (44%) of injection (Table 1).

Since completion of DAA therapy, OAT use was identified in 513 patients (19% of all PWID, n = 2,668).

Individuals were treated predominately with sofosbuvir/ledipasvir (61%) or sofosbuvir plus ribavirin (17%) and the majority were HCV treatment-naive (77%).

Participants were followed for a total of 2,766.8 PYs.

The median follow-up time was 123 days (IQR 84–357) and the median time to the first post-SVR HCV RNA measurement was 86 days (IQR 82–106).

Only 39% of participants had ≥2 post-SVR HCV RNA measurements.

Among those tested more than once during study follow-up, the median time between HCV RNA measurements was 182 days (IQR 90–275).

SECTION

HCV reinfection

PARAGRAPH

During post-SVR follow-up, we identified 40 reinfections, of which 33 (83%) were persistent.

Among the persistent reinfections, four were subsequently retreated and achieved SVR again.

Comparison of pre-treatment and reinfection HCV genotypes are provided (Table S4).

The overall and persistent reinfection rates were 1.44 (95% CI 1.03–1.97) and 1.19 per 100 PYs (95% CI 0.82–1.68), respectively (Table 2).

We observed higher overall and persistent reinfection rates among younger individuals (<45 years), those born after 1975, males, recent PWID, and those with major mental illness, problematic alcohol consumption and HIV co-infection.

SECTION

Reinfections among PWID

PARAGRAPH

Among recent PWID, 21 reinfections were detected during 674.3 PYs of follow-up, yielding a reinfection rate of 3.11 per 100 PYs (95% CI 1.93–4.76).

Of these, 18 were persistent reinfections (rate 2.67 per 100 PYs; 95% CI 1.58–4.22).

Reinfection rates were highest among recent PWID born after 1975 (10.2 per 100 PYs; 95% CI 3.74–22.2; Table 3), those with HIV co-infection (5.67 per 100 PYs; 95% CI 2.59–10.8) and those with problematic alcohol use (4.55 per 100 PYs; 95% CI 2.35–7.94).

There was only one reinfection observed among PWID who used OAT daily in the previous 12 weeks prior to SVR.

Among recent PWID, the cumulative risk of both overall and persistent reinfection initially increased rapidly in the first 36 weeks after SVR, with reinfection being less common afterwards (Fig. 2).

The cumulative risk of reinfection at 52 weeks post-SVR was higher among recent PWID (2.8% overall and 2.3% for persistent reinfection), than among former (1.2% overall and 1.1% for persistent reinfection) or non-PWID (0.2% overall and 0.1% for persistent reinfection).

SECTION

Factors associated with reinfection

PARAGRAPH

In the multivariable Poisson model, PWID with recent (IRR 6.7; 95% CI 1.9–23.5) and former use (IRR 3.7; 95% CI 1.1–12.9) had a significantly elevated risk of overall reinfection (Table 4).

Major mental health illness, problematic alcohol use, or HIV co-infection were not associated with HCV reinfection after SVR.

Results were consistent when the analysis was restricted to persistent reinfections.

In an analysis restricted to PWID, daily OAT use was associated with a non-significant reduction in the risk of reinfection (IRR 0.7; 95% CI 0.1–5.6).

SECTION

Sensitivity analyses

PARAGRAPH

Crude HCV reinfection rates were equally elevated among recent PWID regardless of the algorithm used to identify them (Table S5).

These rates ranged between 2.74 (95% CI 1.63–4.34) to 5.61 per 100 PYs (95% CI 3.21–9.11).

Crude reinfection rates were highest among recent and former PWID identified using the most specific administrative database algorithm that required two medical services visits with only injection drug use-related codes.

Results were also consistent with persistent HCV reinfection rates.

In the multivariable Poisson model, recent PWID remained associated with overall reinfection, with IRRs ranging from 3.7 (95% CI 1.5–9.2) to 5.6 (95% CI 2.3–13.8).

Model results were also consistent when persistent reinfections were examined (Table S6) and when the main analysis was restricted to those who had SVR assessed at least 12 weeks after treatment (Table S7).

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

This paper reports the incidence of HCV reinfection in a large, real-world setting following the introduction of DAA therapies.

To our knowledge, this is the first study of HCV reinfection post-DAA therapy in a representative and well-defined population.

We found that the incidence of reinfection is higher among recent PWID and of note, those who used OAT continuously after completing HCV treatment, had a lower reinfection rate.

These results highlight the need for engaging PWID with ongoing risk in harm-reduction and prevention services following treatment to reduce reinfection risk and to achieve World Health Organization (WHO) HCV elimination goals.27

PARAGRAPH

There is limited data on HCV reinfection following successful HCV treatment with DAAs.

An early meta-analysis of five studies, comprising 131 current or former PWID (range 9 to 42 participants) treated with interferon-based therapies, reported a pooled reinfection rate of 2.4 per 100 PYs.16

More recently, a review of low and high-risk HCV mono-infected patients also treated primarily with interferon-based therapies, estimated reinfection rates of 0.19 and 2.2 per 100 PYs, respectively, although estimates in these studies ranged considerably.17

Additional studies have reported interferon era reinfection rates that range between 4.9 and 15.5 per 100 PYs for those with ongoing injection exposure following treatment.18,28,29

We recently reported reinfection rates of 1.00 and 2.11 per 100 PYs, overall and for PWID, respectively, in BC, following successful interferon-based therapy.20

Our current estimates of the reinfection rate following DAA therapies, overall (1.44 per 100 PYs) and among recent PWID (3.11 per 100 PYs), are slightly higher than previous estimates from the interferon era in the same population.20

However, when we use the same PWID definition as for the interferon analysis, we find that our reinfection estimate among recent PWID is considerably higher (4.99 per 100 PYs, Table S5).

In the interferon era, PWID were less likely to be treated and those who were treated were likely not engaging in risky injecting behaviors, thus resulting in lower HCV reinfection rates.21,24

The introduction of all-oral DAA therapies has mitigated concerns related to HCV treatment duration and compliance, and has increased the number of current and former PWID who are eligible and willing to initiate treatment.30

However, given the fibrosis restrictions in place in BC during the study period, our population likely represents one with more advanced liver disease and a relatively low risk of HCV reinfection.

Thus, as treatment is expanded to everyone, including younger PWID with higher risk injecting behaviors, reinfection rates are likely to increase.

PARAGRAPH

Other studies have reported higher HCV reinfection rates after DAA therapy among PWID and other high-risk populations, including men who have sex with men (MSM).31,32

In a German population-based registry of 2,074 DAA-treated patients (37% PWID, 12% MSM), the overall reinfection rate was 1.8 per 100 PYs.31

In an analysis of 199 current or former PWID enrolled in the C-EDGE Co-Star trial, the reinfection rate was 2.3 per 100 PYs.

As with the current study, more than 50% of reinfections occurred within one year of SVR in both settings.

These data suggest that reinfection rates in our study are similar, though comparison is difficult because of differences in study populations and definitions.

PARAGRAPH

As expected, recent PWID had the highest reinfection rates.

Among recent PWID, males, those with younger age, more recent HCV diagnosis, problematic alcohol use, and HIV co-infection had higher reinfection rates.

Of note, there was only one reinfection identified among PWID engaged with OAT.

These findings confirm the need for harm-reduction and additional support strategies in reducing the risk of reinfection and the future liver disease burden among people with ongoing injecting behaviors, with specific emphasis on younger, male PWID with problematic alcohol use or HIV co-infection.33

As with primary HCV infection, a myriad of single and multicomponent prevention strategies have been suggested to reduce ongoing exposure.10

These include provision of OAT and high-coverage needle-syringe programs (NSP),34 as well as psychotherapy and peer-based drug cessation programs for stimulant use.35

In our previous study, we have shown significant effects of OAT and psychotherapy in reducing the risk of reinfection among PWID treated with interferon.20

Furthermore, additional strategies such as reducing stigma and discrimination associated with injecting behaviors, promotion of mental health services,20 and linkage to social services, to improve food, housing and job security, may also reduce HCV reinfection following successful treatment.36

As PWID with ongoing risk have multiple co-occurring conditions such as HIV co-infection, mental illness, and problematic alcohol use, integration of HCV care within multidisciplinary settings that offer both addiction, mental health and clinical and social work/services have been recommended.37

With the ongoing opioid-related epidemic in North America, integrated services are expected to improve overall health and survival of PWID.

PARAGRAPH

This study utilized administrative-linked data to identify PWID with both recent and former injection exposure.

Given the challenges associated with assessing substance and harm-related exposures using health services data, we employed a range of previously validated PWID definitions from the BC-HTC, however, it is unlikely that any approach would capture all PWID in the province.26

Our primary analysis relied on a highly sensitive definition which included injection-related infections that would capture the most PWID in the province who would not be identified uniquely with major injectable drug or addiction-related diagnoses.38

This provided a more conservative estimate of the rate of HCV reinfection among PWID.

Indeed, our alternative definitions that provided greater specificity, but lower sensitivity, yielded reinfection rates that were 80% higher among recent PWID.

These findings suggest that HCV reinfection rates may be higher among those seeking care for specific drug or harm-related diagnoses and thus these individuals would benefit from interventions such as OAT and needle-syringe programs that could be provided or referred to at the point-of-care.

Alternatively, it is possible that these individuals may be more closely monitored for reinfection, given their ongoing risk behaviors which are reflected in their higher reinfection rates.

PARAGRAPH

A major strength of the current study included the use of administrative-linked data which allowed us to capture all DAA treatment initiators, as well as OAT use, in a well-defined study population.

Furthermore, given centralized HCV RNA testing at BCCDC-PHL, the frequency and timing of RNA measurements reflects the real-world clinical management of HCV-infected individuals post-SVR.

This has resulted in increased generalizability of our findings to other jurisdictions in Canada and abroad.

Lastly, to date, this is the largest and only population-based study of HCV reinfection rates after SVR with all-oral, interferon-free therapies.11

Using linked laboratory and administrative data has provided a strong foundation for population-level monitoring of HCV reinfection rates, which will help support the program planning required to achieve WHO HCV elimination goals.

This framework also demonstrates a proof of concept that could be applied in other settings with similar population-based data sources for monitoring reinfection rates in the entire population.

PARAGRAPH

The results from this study should be interpreted cautiously in light of several limitations.

First, we could not distinguish late relapse from true reinfection which would require sensitive sequencing methods or phylogenetic analyses data.39

However, a study of trial populations demonstrated that <3% of all episodes of sequencing-confirmed late relapse occurred after 12 weeks post-treatment.40

Based on these data it is probable that the recurrences of HCV RNA identified in this study are reinfections.

This is also consistent with the fact that we found larger relative rates for HCV RNA recurrence among PWID with recent high-risk behavior, lending further credence to these being cases of reinfection as opposed to relapse.11

PARAGRAPH

Second, post-SVR follow-up after DAA therapy is limited.

As a result, it is unclear if or how reinfection rates will change over time, after achieving SVR.

It is conceivable that those who have the greatest probability of engaging in high-risk behavior would become reinfected soon after SVR, and thus reinfection rates would decrease with time.

It is also possible that risk factors are variable and high rates of reinfection may persist many years after SVR.19

In addition, it is also important to note that we may have underestimated reinfection rates given that we excluded patients without subsequent HCV RNA measurements who were more likely to be younger, male and recent PWID.

This highlights the need for continued engagement of patients treated for HCV in clinical care to identify possible reinfection episodes.

PARAGRAPH

Furthermore, although the median time to the first HCV RNA measurement after SVR was short, subsequent testing occurred approximately every six months, and thus it is possible that we may have underestimated the true incidence rate of reinfection following SVR given that we may have missed cases of spontaneous clearance after reinfection.41

Recent evidence has suggested higher rates of spontaneous clearance among PWID who are repeatedly exposed to infections.42

However, from a clinical standpoint, persistent reinfections are most relevant and, like others, we have attempted to characterize these reinfections separately from those that also spontaneous clear.18,32

Additionally, we may also have underestimated reinfection rates as we only included individuals who achieved SVR and we did not test whether those who we believe failed treatment were, in fact, quickly reinfected after the end of treatment.

PARAGRAPH

The results from this study have important implications for the management of HCV-infected individuals undergoing DAA therapy.

With the lifting of fibrosis-related treatment restrictions in Canada in 2018 and the greater emphasis on treatment-as-prevention as a strategy for HCV elimination, a greater number of PWID will be receiving DAAs.

This will result in treatment of younger PWID, many of whom will continue to be exposed to HCV through ongoing substance use and high-risk behaviors.

Therefore, it is imperative to minimize the risk of reinfection.

Our data suggest that OAT reduces reinfection risk and likely needs to be part of comprehensive harm-reduction programs that are offered with DAA therapies.

PARAGRAPH

In conclusion, this is the first population-based study to address HCV reinfection in the DAA era.

We employed administrative-data linkages with near complete coverage to assess risk factors for HCV reinfection.

We found that rates of HCV reinfection following successful treatment with DAA therapies are high among people with recent injection drug use exposure.

Of the PWID in our study, only one patient who was on daily OAT was reinfected, suggesting benefits of engagement in this strategy, although further follow-up and a larger sample size are required to assess the long-term impact of OAT.

Our results highlight the need to engage people with ongoing injection risk in harm-reduction and support services to prevent reinfections following successful treatment.

This population-level linked laboratory and administrative dataset provides a platform for comprehensive outcome evaluation in the DAA era.

SECTION

Financial support

PARAGRAPH

This work was supported by British Columbia Centre for Disease Control and the Canadian Institutes of Health Research [Grant # NHC – 142832 and PHE-141773].

Carmine Rossi is supported by a Canadian Institutes of Health Research and Canadian Network on Hepatitis C (CanHepC) Postdoctoral Fellowship Award.

Maryam Darvishian is supported by a CanHepC and Michael Smith Foundation for Health Research Postdoctoral Fellowship Award.

SECTION

Conflict of interest

PARAGRAPH

MK has received grant funding via his institution from Roche Molecular Systems, Boehringer Ingelheim, Merck, Siemens Healthcare Diagnostics and Hologic Inc.

All other authors declare no relevant conflict of interest.

PARAGRAPH

Please refer to the accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.

SECTION

Authors’ contributions

PARAGRAPH

NJ, SW, AY, MA, MK participated in the data acquisition.

NJ conceived the analysis presented in this paper.

CR and NJ designed the study.

CR performed analyses guided by NJ and wrote the first draft of the paper and incorporated revisions.

All authors contributed in the interpretation of results, manuscript preparation and revisions.

All authors read and approved the final manuscript.