10.1016/j.jhep.2018.02.012

FULLTEXT

TITLE

The efficacy of direct anti-HCV drugs improves early post-liver transplant survival and induces significant changes in waiting list composition

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is the main cause of end-stage liver disease leading to liver transplantation (LT) in the Western world, and until the widespread use of the direct-acting antiviral (DAA) regimens it had a significant detrimental impact on post-transplant patient and graft survival.1–4

However, the availability of DAAs, harbouring excellent efficacy and tolerability, has represented a dramatic change in the prognosis of patients with HCV infection, as sustained virological response (SVR) rates are around 95% even in LT patients and in the range of 85–90% in patients with decompensated cirrhosis.5–11

The impact of viral eradication on patient survival and the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has been demonstrated in studies both in the interferon (IFN) and DAA eras.12–14

However, the possibility of using DAAs in patients with more advanced liver disease may lead to significant changes in the LT waiting list and in early post-LT survival.15

In this regard, two registry and population-based studies from the US have shown a significant decrease in the proportion of patients with HCV-related liver disease that are included on the waiting list, particularly with the indication of decompensated cirrhosis, accompanied by a progressive increase in patients being put on the waiting list because of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) and alcoholic liver disease.16,17

In addition, it has been demonstrated in other studies that approximately 20% of HCV-infected patients with decompensated cirrhosis who achieved SVR on the waiting list could be delisted because of clinical improvement.18,19

In a recent study, a significant improvement in post-LT survival in the period 2011–2014 was seen compared to 2004–2010.20

In this study, such improvement was also seen in patients who underwent LT for other aetiologies of liver disease, although the magnitude of improvement seemed to be higher in patients with HCV-related liver disease.

In this manuscript, we aimed to evaluate the efficacy of DAA on the composition of the LT waiting list and particularly on early post-LT survival.

SECTION

Patients and methods

PARAGRAPH

This is a cohort study of patients who were listed for LT in Catalonia (north-eastern Spain).

This cohort includes all patients treated at the three centres (Hospital Clínic, Hospital Bellvitge, Hospital Vall d’Hebron) that offer LT in the region and that serve a population of 7.5 million inhabitants.

In Catalonia, OCATT (Organització Catalana de Trasplantaments), a public institution depending on the Catalan Health Department, is responsible for the organisation, management and coordination of the different solid organs' waiting lists.

The three LT centres, who share the same indications and contraindications for LT, have a common liver waiting list that is periodically updated according to the model for end-stage liver disease (MELD) score.21

The three centres prospectively and electronically provide OCATT with the clinical and analytical data of the patients on the waiting list, and OCATT is responsible for updating the waiting list and the management of organ distribution.

In addition, the three centres communicate OCATT waiting list and post-transplant survival on a biannual basis.

Finally, since DAA approval, data on anti-HCV antiviral therapy, including the indication for treatment and the outcome of therapy are periodically recorded and monitored by the Catalan Health Department.

PARAGRAPH

In this report, all first entries in the adult LT waiting list between January 1st 2008 and December 31st 2016 were identified.

Patients listed for urgent transplantation (acute liver failure), and those with prior transplantations were excluded.

Data on the aetiology of liver disease and indication for LT were extracted from the data files of the patients provided by the centres at waiting list inclusion.

The indications for LT, as communicated by the different centres to OCATT, were categorised as “decompensated cirrhosis”, “HCC”, or “others”.

With regard to the aetiology of liver disease, we focused on changes in three specific aetiologies: hepatitis C, alcohol, and non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), and the remaining aetiologies (hepatitis B virus [HBV], cholestatic, polycystic or metabolic diseases) were classified together as “others”.

Hepatitis C was defined as the presence of anti-HCV antibodies, independent from HCV RNA status.

Patients with dual causes (i.e. HCV-HBV coinfection, HCV + alcohol) were categorised as HCV, and patients with the diagnosis of cryptogenic cirrhosis and NASH were categorised together.

PARAGRAPH

The time of study was divided into two periods to evaluate the impact of the different antiviral therapies.

The first period (2008–2013) accounts for IFN-based regimens, while the second period (2014–2016) includes DAA-based therapy.

Trends in the indications for LT and in the aetiology of liver disease were evaluated according to the moment of entry to the waiting list.

In contrast, in order to properly reflect the effect of DAAs, delisting because of improvement after antiviral therapy was evaluated according to the actual year of delisting, independently from the year in which patients were included in the list.

Similarly, three-year post-LT patient survival was evaluated according to the actual year of transplantation.

PARAGRAPH

Patients were considered for antiviral therapy with DAA, either on the waiting list or after LT, at physician and centre discretion, and depending on the availability of compassionate use or expanded access programmes until the development of the Spanish Strategic Plan for hepatitis C treatment in February 2015, that permitted the access of all patients on the waiting list and LT recipients to therapy.

Treatment regimen and duration, as well as use of ribavirin, were chosen based on the available drugs at the time of therapy and according to the European Association for the Study of the Liver guidelines when available.22

Timing of and response to DAA, both on the waiting list and after LT, were extracted from the data centralised by OCATT.

PARAGRAPH

Median and interquartile range (IQR) were used to describe quantitative variables and percentages for categorical variables.

Differences in qualitative variables were assessed using Chi-square or Fisher’s tests, while Kruskall-Wallis test was used to study the differences in quantitative variables.

The changes in the indications of LT across time were evaluated using Chi-square test for trend in proportions.

Post-LT three-year patient survival was evaluated with Kaplan-Meier analysis, and univariate and multivariate Cox regression analysis was used to evaluate the variables associated with post-transplant patient survival.

Available variables included transplant time period, HCV serostatus, antiviral therapy, variables related to the recipient, donor (age) and surgery (cold ischaemia time).

Statistical analysis was performed with R Software version 3.3.2 (R Foundation for Statistical Computing).

Patients were followed until June 30th 2017.

PARAGRAPH

For further details regarding the materials used, please refer to the CTAT table.

SECTION

Results

SECTION

Patients

PARAGRAPH

During the study period, 1,483 patients meeting the study inclusion criteria and without exclusion criteria were admitted to the waiting list.

The main characteristics of the patients at waiting list admission, in the whole cohort, and according to anti-HCV serology and period of waiting list inclusion are shown (Table 1).

SECTION

Changes in waiting list composition

PARAGRAPH

The total number of patients included on the waiting list decreased during the study period, from 180 in 2008 to 138 in 2016.

Inclusions on the waiting list are shown for patients throughout the study period with HCV-, alcohol- and NASH-related liver disease (Fig. 1A).

Inclusions of patients with HCV-related liver disease significantly decreased across time, from 94/180 (52%) indications in 2008 to 33/138 (24%) in 2016 (Fig. 1B), with the sharpest decrease taking place in the years 2015 and 2016 (p <0.001).

Paralleling the decrease, NASH-cryptogenic related indications significantly increased, from 5/180 (3%) in 2008 to 14/138 (10%) in 2016 (p = 0.001) (Fig. 1C).

In contrast, despite a numerically high proportion of alcohol-related indications in recent years (from 52/180 [29%] in 2008 to 53/138 [38%] in 2016), this increase was not statistically significant (p = 0.229, Fig. 1D).

When analyzed categorically (2008–2013 vs. 2014–2016) the same results were observed (Table 1): HCV-related liver indications decreased significantly (47% vs. 35%, p <0.001), NASH-cryptogenic related indications increased significantly (4% vs. 7%, p = 0.003) and alcohol-related indications did not significantly change (32% vs. 34%, p = 0.541).

Patients classified as “other aetiologies” also increased significantly in the second period (17% vs. 23%, p = 0.004).

PARAGRAPH

Within HCV-related indications, decompensated cirrhosis decreased significantly during the study period (Fig. 2): while it accounted for 44/94 (47%) HCV-related indications in 2008, only 8/33 (24%) anti-HCV positive candidates were included in the list in 2016 because of decompensated cirrhosis (p = 0.004).

This was paralleled by a relative increase in inclusions in the waiting list because of HCC in patients with HCV, despite the absolute number of HCC-HCV inclusions also decreased over time.

SECTION

Antiviral therapy

PARAGRAPH

Thirty-five of the 477 anti-HCV positive patients included on the waiting list in the period 2008–2013 were HCV RNA negative at waiting list inclusion (7%).

Of the 442 patients with positive HCV RNA at admission to the waiting list, 57 (13%) underwent antiviral therapy on the waiting list: 24 with pegylated IFN (PegIFN) and ribavirin, five with triple therapy with boceprevir or telaprevir and 28 with DAA (see later).

SVR was 46% (11/24) for patients treated with PegIFN and ribavirin and 80% (4/5) for patients treated with triple therapy.

PARAGRAPH

Among the 224 anti-HCV positive patients included on the waiting list between 2014 and 2016 (n = 168), or who were on the waiting list at the beginning of the period (n = 56), 42 (19%) were already HCV RNA-negative at waiting list admission, 118 (53%) received antiviral treatment with DAAs on the waiting list (43 with decompensated cirrhosis and 75 with HCC as the indication of LT), 10 (4%) were delisted because of disease progression or died before starting therapy, and in the remaining 54 (24%) treatment was postponed after LT for different reasons (considered too sick, absence of available antiviral therapy or concerns regarding HCC).

Interestingly, the proportion of anti-HCV positive patients who were already HCV RNA negative when included in the waiting list increased over time, from 5% in 2014, to 17% in 2015 and then 63% in 2016.

PARAGRAPH

The most frequently used DAA combination before LT was sofosbuvir and daclatasvir, which was employed in 56 patients (47%), in 13 of them with ribavirin.

The combination of sofosbuvir and simeprevir, with (n = 7) or without (n = 18) ribavirin, was used in 25 patients (21%), while sofosbuvir/ledipasvir, with (n = 16) or without ribavirin (n = 6), was used in 22 patients (19%), and sofosbuvir and ribavirin, with (n = 4) or without PegIFN (n = 4), in eight patients (7%).

The remaining patients underwent treatment with other combinations (simeprevir and daclatasvir, 3D).

Patients with decompensated cirrhosis were more frequently treated with sofosbuvir and daclatasvir-based regimens (60%) than patients with HCC (39%) (p = 0.03), who were more frequently treated with sofosbuvir/ledipasvir-based regimens (26% vs. 7%, p = 0.01).

PARAGRAPH

Among the 118 patients treated on the waiting list, intention-to-treat (ITT) SVR at 12 weeks (SVR12) was 91% (107/118).

ITT SVR12 was 95% (71/75) in patients with HCC as the indication for LT and 84% (36/43) in patients with decompensated cirrhosis (p = 0.05).

Ten patients could be delisted because of improvement to liver function after achieving SVR, representing 13% of overall patients with decompensated cirrhosis and 23% of patients with decompensated cirrhosis that underwent treatment on the waiting list, in contrast with only 4% of all HCV-infected patients with decompensated cirrhosis who were delisted because of improvement in the period 2008–2013 (p = 0.02).

There were no differences in the proportion of patients with HCC who were withdrawn from the waiting list because of disease progression between the two periods (p = 0.406).

PARAGRAPH

With respect to the 54 HCV-infected patients who underwent transplantation and were not treated, 46 (87%) have undergone antiviral treatment with DAA after transplantation: 22 during the first year, 17 during the second year, and seven during the third year after LT. In this population, the most frequent DAA combination was sofosbuvir/ledipasvir, which was used in 19 patients (41%), in seven of them with ribavirin, followed by sofosbuvir and daclatasvir (10 patients, 22%) and sofosbuvir with simeprevir in nine patients (20%, four of them with ribavirin).

Forty-four patients (96%) have achieved SVR12 after LT.

SECTION

Post-transplant survival analysis

PARAGRAPH

During the study period, 1,114 patients underwent LT, 753 in the period 2008–2013 and 361 in 2014–2016.

Median donor age was 56 years and median ischaemia time was 384 min.

Ischaemia time significantly increased in the second period, while there were no statistically significant differences in donor age between the two periods.

In the whole cohort of patients, post-LT patient survival significantly increased in the second era (Fig. 3).

As shown (Table 2), the variables independently associated to post-LT survival in the whole cohort were the time period, HCV serology and donor age.

The improvement in survival was driven solely by anti-HCV positive patients (Fig. 4A), as there were no differences in survival between the two eras in anti-HCV negative patients (Fig. 4B).

Indeed, when multivariate Cox regression analysis was performed only in anti-HCV positive patients (Table 2), time period and donor age were the only variables independently associated with survival.

In contrast, in anti-HCV negative patients, time period was not associated with survival, neither with univariate nor multivariate analysis (Table 2).

PARAGRAPH

Finally, when we compared post-LT patient survival between anti-HCV positive and anti-HCV negative patients, we observed that anti-HCV negative patients had a significantly better survival after LT (p <0.001) than anti-HCV positive patients in the period 2008–2013.

In contrast, there was no difference in post-LT survival according to HCV serostatus in the period 2014–2016 (p = 0.645).

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

Despite the high efficacy of DAA therapies in patients with chronic hepatitis C infection, there are still few data on the clinical effects of these therapies on LT waiting list composition or on post-LT survival.

In this registry study, we have been able to show that the introduction of DAA therapies is associated with a significant improvement in survival of LT recipients.

Although a direct effect of DAA therapy is difficult to demonstrate, we clearly show that survival improved only in LT recipients with HCV infection after the introduction of DAA therapies, and the time period was independently associated with survival in anti-HCV positive patients.

Importantly, this was not the case in the remaining indications for LT.

PARAGRAPH

Although not unexpected considering the efficacy of these drugs, our findings suggest for the first time that the main problem of LT programmes around the world, hepatitis C recurrence, will no longer impact patient and graft survival.

In addition, these results support and recognise those public health programmes that have permitted the widespread access to DAA to hepatitis C patients with advanced liver disease, and encourage the policies aimed to expand the access to all patients with HCV infection.

PARAGRAPH

Our results are in line with a recent report from the UNOS database that revealed that the risk of post-LT graft failure significantly decreased in the 2011–2014 era compared to 2004–2010.20

However, in that study graft failure decreased not only in HCV-infected patients, but also in alcohol, HBV, and NASH-related LT recipients, thus an association with DAA therapies (which were in fact not widely available in that period, but rather since 201423) cannot be extracted from such data.

In contrast, we clearly show that, in our cohort, improvements in post-LT survival are exclusive to HCV-infected patients since 2014.

We can argue that the improvement in survival in HCV-infected LT recipients is mainly because of the prevention of hepatitis C recurrence.

Firstly, a large proportion of patients (53%) received antiviral treatment and achieved SVR while awaiting transplantation.

In addition, an increasing number of anti-HCV positive patients were admitted to the waiting list with undetectable HCV RNA, reflecting an increased access to therapy in patients with cirrhosis or advanced fibrosis.

Finally, the early access to and high efficacy of DAAs after LT also contributed to the improvement in the survival of recipients, as most patients that underwent LT with detectable HCV RNA received antiviral therapy early after LT and achieved viral eradication.24

This latter finding is also important from a clinical point of view, particularly considering the concerns raised on the efficacy and potential effects of DAAs in patients with HCC, or those related to the futility of DAA in patients with high MELD scores, meaning that some patients with detectable HCV RNA will undergo LT and thus require antiviral therapy after LT.25,26

PARAGRAPH

These data support the results of two recent reports from large registries that showed that trends in LT waiting list inclusions have significantly changed in the US in the last years, with a significant decrease in HCV-related decompensated cirrhosis since the introduction of DAAs, which was accompanied by significant increases in wait listings because of HCV-related HCC and NASH- and alcohol-related indications.16,17

In addition, similar results have been very recently shown in another Spanish study, that did not look at trends in other aetiologies of liver disease.27

In our cohort, paralleling the decrease in indications from patients with HCV, NASH-related indications significantly increased.

With respect to alcohol, while a trend towards an increase in indications was noted, this was not statistically significant.

Remarkably, we noticed a sharp decrease in HCV-related indications and a similarly abrupt increase in NASH indications taking place in 2015.

We hypothesise that, because of the efficacy of DAAs, a relevant number of patients with decompensated HCV-related cirrhosis who achieved SVR were not listed while awaiting a clinical improvement (which indeed takes place in a significant proportion of patients).

Conversely, the absence of a definite treatment for NASH, together with a more accurate diagnosis of the condition in the last few years, may have contributed to making these patients more prone to being listed.

Importantly, these increases could not overcome the decrease in wait listings of anti-HCV positive patients, thus overall inclusions in the waiting list significantly decreased during the study period.

It is possible that these changes become even more notable in the next few years, as predictably, the widespread use of DAAs in patients without advanced fibrosis will lead to a lower incidence of decompensated cirrhosis and HCC in this population.28,29

In this setting of such changes in the composition of the waiting list, we could speculate that transplant programmes will probably face significant changes in the indications for LT in the near future, such as expanding criteria for HCC, acute-on-chronic liver failure or highly selected patients with acute alcoholic hepatitis.30–34

Nevertheless, expanding indications will need to be carefully balanced with the possibility of worsening post-LT outcomes, particularly taking into account the availability of organ donors.35

PARAGRAPH

Our study has some limitations, particularly those related to the registry nature of the study.

However, unlike other registries, the fact that only three centres are involved permits a higher level of granularity of the data, and in fact we have been able to describe in detail the access to DAA of the cohort.

In addition, the three centres have a considerable transplant and waiting list activity, thus we had the opportunity to study a large cohort that includes nearly 1,500 patients admitted to the waiting list and more than 1,000 transplanted.

Furthermore, HCV infection was defined serologically and not considering HCV RNA status.

However, the proportion of patients in the waiting list that achieve SVR with IFN-based treatments has been demonstrated to be very low, and thus its impact in the improvement of survival or the composition of the waiting list in the first period seems to be negligible.36,37

Indeed, we had the opportunity to evaluate HCV RNA status, showing that a vast majority of patients were HCV RNA positive at waiting list admission, and very few of those were treated before LT in the first period.

Finally, considering the much higher efficacy and applicability of new DAAs compared to 1st generation protease inhibitors (PI), we decided to set the threshold for treatment periods in 2014.

This is in contrast with other studies that also included the period in which 1st generation PI were available (2011–2013).16

Although a potential impact of the use of these drugs in the outcomes of patients cannot be fully discarded, it must be stressed that the use of these regimens was extremely limited in our cohort, and thus their contribution in the changes in the waiting list or post-LT survival in our setting seems marginal.

PARAGRAPH

In conclusion, we have demonstrated for the first time that the availability of DAAs is associated with significant improvements in survival after liver transplantation in HCV-infected LT candidates.

Considering the tremendous impact of HCV recurrence in the results of LT, it is clear that DAA therapy will dramatically change the scenario of LT, potentially contributing to long-term improvements in survival.

In addition, DAAs are associated with a decrease in the indications for LT related to HCV, which is notably changing the composition of the waiting list.

These changes will enable the expansion of LT for other indications in the future.

SECTION

Financial support

PARAGRAPH

This study was supported by the Instituto de Salud Carlos III (PI14/01055, M Navasa; PI15/00151, X Forns), co-funded by the European Regional development Fund (ERDF), and by the Secretaria d'Universitats i Recerca del Departament d'Economia i Coneixement (grant 2014_SGR_605).

CIBERehd is funded by the Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación, Spain.

IDIBAPS is part of CERCA Programme (Generalitat de Catalunya).

E Mauro was supported by a Grant from BEC.AR.

SECTION

Conflict of interest

PARAGRAPH

Maria-Carlota Londoño is a consultant for Janssen, Gilead, Abbvie, MSD and BMS.

Xavier Forns has received unrestricted grant support from Abbvie and has acted as a consultant for Gilead and Abbvie.

Lluís Castells is a consultant for Janssen, Gilead, Abbvie and BMS and Jose Castellote for Abbvie, Gilead and MSD.

Miquel Navasa and Gonzalo Crespo have acted as consultants for Novartis.

The other co-authors have no disclosures.

PARAGRAPH

Please refer to the accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.

SECTION

Authors’ contributions

PARAGRAPH

GC: study concept and design; acquisition of data; analysis and interpretation of data; drafting of the manuscript.

NT: acquisition of data; analysis and interpretation of data; statistical analysis, drafting of the manuscript.

MCL: study concept and design; acquisition of data; analysis and interpretation of data; drafting of the manuscript.

EM: acquisition of data; analysis and interpretation of data; drafting of the manuscript.

CB: acquisition of data, critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content.

LC: acquisition of data, critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content.

JC: acquisition of data, critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content.

JT: acquisition of data, critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content.

XF: study concept and design, acquisition of data, critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content.

MN: study concept and design, acquisition of data, critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content.