10.1016/j.jhep.2019.04.010

ABSTRACT

TITLE

Efficient long-term amplification of hepatitis B virus isolates after infection of slow proliferating HepG2-NTCP cells

PARAGRAPH

As hepatitis B virus (HBV) spreads through the infected liver it is simultaneously secreted into the blood.

HBV-susceptible in vitro infection models do not efficiently amplify viral progeny or support cell-to-cell spread.

We sought to establish a cell culture system for the amplification of infectious HBV from clinical specimens.

PARAGRAPH

An HBV-susceptible sodium-taurocholate cotransporting polypeptide-overexpressing HepG2 cell clone (HepG2-NTCPsec+) producing high titers of infectious progeny was selected.

Secreted HBV progeny were characterized by native gel electrophoresis and electron microscopy.

Comparative RNA-seq transcriptomics was performed to quantify the expression of host proviral and restriction factors.

Viral spread routes were evaluated using HBV entry- or replication inhibitors, visualization of viral cell-to-cell spread in reporter cells, and nearest neighbor infection determination.

Amplification kinetics of HBV genotypes B-D were analyzed.

PARAGRAPH

Infected HepG2-NTCPsec+ secreted high levels of large HBV surface protein-enveloped infectious HBV progeny with typical appearance under electron microscopy.

RNA-seq transcriptomics revealed that HBV does not induce significant gene expression changes in HepG2-NTCPsec+, however, transcription factors favoring HBV amplification were more strongly expressed than in less permissive HepG2-NTCPsec−.

Upon inoculation with HBV-containing patient sera, rates of infected cells increased from 10% initially to 70% by viral spread to adjacent cells, and viral progeny and antigens were efficiently secreted.

HepG2-NTCPsec+ supported up to 1,300-fold net amplification of HBV genomes depending on the source of virus.

Viral spread and amplification were abolished by entry and replication inhibitors; viral rebound was observed after inhibitor discontinuation.

PARAGRAPH

The novel HepG2-NTCPsec+ cells efficiently support the complete HBV life cycle, long-term viral spread and amplification of HBV derived from patients or cell culture, resembling relevant features of HBV-infected patients.

