10.1016/j.jhep.2018.04.013

ABSTRACT

TITLE

Liver stiffness measurement in the primary care setting detects high rates of advanced fibrosis and predicts liver-related events in hepatitis C

PARAGRAPH

As many as 70% of individuals with chronic hepatitis C (CHC) are managed solely in primary care.

The aims of this study were to determine the prevalence of elevated liver stiffness measurement (LSM) in a cohort of community managed patients with CHC and to evaluate predictors of advanced liver disease and liver-related events.

PARAGRAPH

A prospective cohort of adult patients with CHC were recruited from 21 primary care practices throughout Victoria, Australia.

Inclusion criteria included the presence of CHC for >6 months, no recent (<18 months) specialist input and no history of hepatocellular carcinoma.

Clinical assessment, LSM and phlebotomy were carried out in primary care.

A hospital cohort was recruited for comparison.

Participants were followed longitudinally and monitored for liver-related events.

PARAGRAPH

Over 26 months, 780 community patients were recruited and included in the analysis.

The median LSM was 6.9 kPa in the community, with 16.5% of patients at risk of advanced fibrosis (LSM ≥12.5 kPa); of these 8.5% had no laboratory features of advanced liver disease.

The proportion at risk of cirrhosis was no different between the community and hospital cohorts (p = 0.169).

At-risk alcohol consumption, advancing age, elevated body mass index and alanine aminotransferase were independent predictors of elevated LSM.

Over a median follow-up of 15.2 months, liver-related events occurred in 9.3% of those with an LSM ≥12.5 kPa.

An LSM of 24 kPa had the highest predictive power for liver-related events (hazard ratio 152; p <0.001).

PARAGRAPH

The prevalence of advanced fibrosis, as determined by LSM, in primary care managed CHC is significant and comparable to a hospital cohort.

Furthermore, this study supports the use of LSM as a community screening tool in a CHC population and indicates a possible role in predicting liver-related events.

