10.1016/j.jhep.2019.12.001

ABSTRACT

TITLE

Non-enhanced Magnetic Resonance Imaging as a Surveillance Tool for Hepatocellular Carcinoma: Comparison with Ultrasound

PARAGRAPH

Recently revised international guidelines for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) suggest that patients with inadequate ultrasonography be assessed by alternative imaging modalities.

Given short scan time and the absence of contrast agent-associated risks, non-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has potential as a surveillance tool.

This study compared the performance of non-enhanced MRI and ultrasonography for HCC surveillance in high-risk patients.

PARAGRAPH

We included 382 high-risk patients in a prospective cohort who underwent 1 to 3 rounds of paired gadoxetic acid-enhanced MRI and ultrasonography.

Non-enhanced MRI, consisting of diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) and T2-weighted imaging, was simulated and retrospectively analyzed, with results considered positive when lesion(s) ≥ 1cm showed diffusion restriction or mild–moderate T2 hyperintensity.

Ultrasonography results were retrieved from patient records.

HCC was diagnosed histologically and/or radiologically.

Sensitivity, positive predictive value (PPV), specificity, and negative predictive value (NPV) were evaluated using generalized estimating equations.

PARAGRAPH

Forty-eight HCCs were diagnosed in 43 patients.

Per-lesion and per-exam sensitivities of non-enhanced MRI were 77.1% and 79.1%, respectively, higher than ultrasonography (25.0% and 27.9%, respectively, P <0.001).

Per-lesion and per-exam PPVs were higher for non-enhanced MRI (56.9% and 61.8%, respectively) than ultrasonography (16.7% and 17.7%, respectively).

Specificities of non-enhanced MRI (97.9%) and ultrasonography (94.5%) differ significantly (P <0.001).

NPV was higher for non-enhanced MRI (99.1%) than ultrasonography (96.9%).

Estimated scan time of non-enhanced MRI was <6 minutes.

PARAGRAPH

Given the high performance, short scan time, and the lack of contrast agent-associated risks, non-enhanced MRI is a promising option for HCC surveillance in high-risk patients.

