10.1016/j.jhep.2018.11.013

ABSTRACT

TITLE

Epidemiology and natural history of hepatitis C virus infection among children and young people

PARAGRAPH

Chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is a global health burden.

Although HCV infection rarely contributes to morbidity during childhood, most HCV-infected children develop chronic HCV with a lifetime risk of liver disease.

Little is known about the development of long-term liver disease and the effect of treatment in patients infected with HCV in childhood.

PARAGRAPH

This study was a retrospective review of patients infected with HCV in childhood enrolled in HCV Research UK.

A total of 1,049 patients were identified and included.

PARAGRAPH

The main routes of infection were intravenous drug use (53%), blood product exposure (24%) and perinatal infection (11%).

Liver disease developed in 32% of patients, a median of 33 years after infection, irrespective of the mode of infection.

Therefore, patients with perinatal exposure developed cirrhosis at an earlier age than the rest of the risk groups.

The incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) was 5%, liver transplant 4% and death occurred in 3%.

Overall, 663 patients were treated (55% with interferon/pegylated interferon and 40% with direct-acting antivirals).

Sustained virological response (SVR) was achieved in 406 (75%).

There was a higher mortality rate among patients without SVR vs. those with SVR (5% vs. 1%, p = 0.003).

Treatment was more effective in patients without cirrhosis and disease progression was less frequent (13%) than in patients with cirrhosis at the time of therapy (28%) p < 0.001.

Patients with cirrhosis were more likely to develop HCC, require liver transplantation, or die.

PARAGRAPH

HCV infection in young people causes significant liver disease, which can now be prevented with antiviral therapy.

Early treatment, especially before development of cirrhosis is essential.

Detection of HCV should be aimed at relevant risk groups and antiviral therapy should be made available in childhood to prevent long-term liver disease and spread of HCV.

