10.1016/j.jhep.2019.05.027

ABSTRACT

TITLE

Loss of Fbxw7 synergizes with activated Akt signaling to promote c-Myc dependent cholangiocarcinogenesis

PARAGRAPH

The ubiquitin ligase F-box and WD repeat domain-containing 7 (FBXW7) is recognized as a tumor suppressor in many cancer types due to its ability to promote the degradation of numerous oncogenic target proteins.

Herein, we aimed to elucidate its role in intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (iCCA).

PARAGRAPH

Herein, we first confirmed that FBXW7 gene expression was reduced in human iCCA specimens.

To identify the molecular mechanisms by which FBXW7 dysfunction promotes cholangiocarcinogenesis, we generated a mouse model by hydrodynamic tail vein injection of Fbxw7ΔF, a dominant negative form of Fbxw7, either alone or in association with an activated/myristylated form of AKT (myr-AKT).

We then confirmed the role of c-MYC in human iCCA cell lines and its relationship to FBXW7 expression in human iCCA specimens.

PARAGRAPH

FBXW7 mRNA expression is almost ubiquitously downregulated in human iCCA specimens.

While forced overexpression of Fbxw7ΔF alone did not induce any appreciable abnormality in the mouse liver, co-expression with AKT triggered cholangiocarcinogenesis and mice had to be euthanized by 15 weeks post-injection.

At the molecular level, a strong induction of Fbxw7 canonical targets, including Yap, Notch2, and c-Myc oncoproteins, was detected.

However, only c-MYC was consistently confirmed as a FBXW7 target in human CCA cell lines.

Most importantly, selected ablation of c-Myc completely impaired iCCA formation in AKT/Fbxw7ΔF mice, whereas deletion of either Yap or Notch2 only delayed tumorigenesis in the same model.

In human iCCA specimens, an inverse correlation between the expression levels of FBXW7 and c-MYC transcriptional activity was observed.

PARAGRAPH

Downregulation of FBXW7 is ubiquitous in human iCCA and cooperates with AKT to induce cholangiocarcinogenesis in mice via c-Myc-dependent mechanisms.

Targeting c-MYC might represent an innovative therapy against iCCA exhibiting low FBXW7 expression.

