10.1016/j.jhep.2019.08.035

ABSTRACT

TITLE

Targeting Jak/Stat pathway as a therapeutic strategy against SP/CD44+ tumorigenic cells in Akt/β-catenin-driven hepatocellular carcinoma

PARAGRAPH

Hepatic resection and liver transplantation with adjuvant chemo- and radiotherapy are the mainstay of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) treatment, but the 5-year survival rate remains poor because of frequent recurrence and intrahepatic metastasis.

Only sorafenib and lenvatinib are currently approved for the first-line treatment of advanced, unresected HCC, but they yield modest survival benefits.

Thus, there is a need to identify new therapeutic targets to improve current HCC treatment modalities.

PARAGRAPH

The HCC tumor model was generated by hydrodynamic transfection of AKT1 and β-catenin (CTNNB1) oncogenes.

Cancer cells with stemness properties were characterized following isolation using side population (SP) and CD44 surface markers by flow cytometry.

The effect of Jak/Stat inhibitors was analyzed in vitro by using tumorsphere culture and in vivo using an allograft mouse model.

PARAGRAPH

Co-activation of both Wnt/β-catenin and Akt/mTOR pathways was found in 14.4% of our HCC patient cohort.

More importantly, these patients showed poorer survival than those with either Wnt/β-catenin or Akt/mTOR pathway activation alone, demonstrating the clinical relevance of our study.

In addition, we observed that Akt/β-catenin tumors contained a subpopulation of cells with stem/progenitor-like characteristics identified through SP analysis and expression of the cancer stem cell-like marker CD44, which may contribute to tumor self-renewal and drug resistance.

Consequently, we identified small molecule inhibitors of the Jak/Stat pathway that demonstrated efficacy in mitigating tumor proliferation and formation in Akt/β-catenin-driven HCC.

PARAGRAPH

In conclusion, we have shown that Akt/β-catenin tumors contain a subpopulation of tumor-initiating cells with stem/progenitor-like characteristics which can be effectively targeted with inhibitors of the Jak/Stat pathway, demonstrating that inhibition of the Jak/Stat pathway could be an alternative method to overcome drug resistance and effectively treat Akt/β-catenin-driven HCC tumors.

