10.1016/j.jhep.2019.08.035

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Targeting Jak/Stat pathway as a therapeutic strategy against SP/CD44+ tumorigenic cells in Akt/β-catenin-driven hepatocellular carcinoma

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the fourth leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide with a very high mortality rate.1

Hepatitis B and C viral infections, aflatoxin B1, and alcohol abuse are main risks factors for HCC development.2

Despite treatment with advanced surgical resection, liver transplantation, or ablation, the 5-year survival rate for HCC patients remains poor due to frequent recurrence and intrahepatic metastasis.3

Currently, the first-line FDA-approved drugs for the treatment of advanced HCC are sorafenib and lenvatinib, both of which are multi-kinase inhibitors of Raf, VEGF, PDGF and c-kit signaling with anti-proliferative and anti-angiogenic activity.4–6

However, patients treated with these multi-kinase inhibitors showed marginal overall survival improvements of 2 to 3 months compared to placebo group, with low partial treatment response rates due to drug resistance in most instances.7

Therefore, there is a need to understand the biology of hepatocarcinogenesis and identify new therapeutic targets to improve current HCC treatment modalities.

PARAGRAPH

Hepatocarcinogenesis is a multistep process involving multiple signaling cascades which contribute to a heterogeneous molecular profile.

Recent deep molecular profiling efforts have identified several main mutations in HCC including the gene for β-catenin, CTNNB1 which occurs at a frequency of about 30% of all HCC tumors.8

In addition, dysregulated signaling pathways of the Wnt/β-catenin, Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK, and PI3K/Akt/mTOR axis have been frequently identified in HCC.8

In particular, components of the Wnt/β-catenin pathway (e.g. APC, β-catenin and GSK3β) are dysregulated in more than 25% of patients with HCC.

Importantly, transcriptomic analysis of HCC clinical specimens identified specific pathway activation, in particular, the Wnt and Akt pathways that are associated with distinct clinical outcomes.9

Moreover, Wnt and Akt pathway activation was observed in more than 50% of the tumors studied, suggesting that therapies targeting these activated signaling modules could have important clinical implications.

PARAGRAPH

The existence of a subpopulation of cancer cells with stemness properties (CCSPs) has been identified in various solid tumors, including hepatic tumors.10,11

Commonly used surface markers to identify self-renewal and tumorigenic populations in HCCs include CD133, CD90, CD13, EpCAM and CD44.11–14

However, no single marker has been shown to be specific and universal in identifying CCSPs due to the molecular heterogeneity of the tumors.

Alternatively, the use of side population (SP) to prospectively isolate and characterize CCSPs based on their ability to efflux Hoechst 33342 is also frequently employed.10,15–18

The activated Wnt/β-catenin pathway has been implicated in various aspects of both normal stem cell and CCSP biology, including in the liver.19,20

Additionally, Akt was previously identified to contribute to chemoresistance mechanisms in CCSPs in HCC.21

To study the crosstalk between Akt and Wnt/β-catenin pathways in HCC, we utilized a hydrodynamic transfection mouse model of liver cancer that overexpresses the activated forms of AKT1 and CTNNB1.22,23

We aimed to characterize and study the tumorspheres isolated from these Akt/β-catenin-driven tumors to screen for potential small molecule inhibitors with therapeutic potential in HCC.

SECTION

Materials and methods

SECTION

Hydrodynamic transfection mouse model

PARAGRAPH

To generate an Akt/β-catenin hepatic tumor mouse model, 20 µg of 2 plasmids encoding oncogenic forms of myr-Akt (myristoylated Akt) and Δ90Nβ-catenin (first 90 amino acids deleted) and transposon were mixed with 2 µg of plasmids encoding the sleeping beauty (SB) transposase in 2.5 ml of PBS and injected into the lateral tail vein of 6- to 8-week-old male (n = 5) and female (n = 40) wild-type FVB/N mice.

pT3-myr-AKT-HA tagged (Addgene plasmid #31789) and pT3-N90-beta-catenin-Myc tagged (Addgene plasmid #31785) were gifts from Xin Chen.24,25

In all experiments, age- and gender-matched mice (female) were used, unless otherwise specified.

All mice were maintained in an enriched environment on a 12 h light-dark cycle and fed with Teklad global 18% protein rodent diet.

All Akt/β-catenin tumorspheres were harvested from female Akt/β-catenin-hydrodynamically transfected FVB/N mice.

All animal experiments were performed according to guidelines and protocols (R18-1508) approved by the National University of Singapore Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC).

SECTION

Tumorsphere isolation, allograft transplantation and in vivo tumor studies

PARAGRAPH

Liver tumor tissues from female Akt/β-catenin tumor mice were harvested and diced into 1–2 mm pieces before being treated with 1 mg/ml collagenase/dispase (Roche, IN) for 5 min at 37 °C.

The tumor suspension was then filtered through a sterile medical gauze and centrifuged for 5 min at 1,000 rpm and 4 °C.

This was repeated by passing cells through a 70 and 40 µm cell strainer.

Subsequently, tumor cells were resuspended in 1X red blood cell lysis buffer and incubated on ice for 3 min, followed by washing and centrifuging at 1,000 rpm for 5 min.

Thereafter, cells were resuspended in serum-free media supplemented with defined growth factors,26 and seeded into cell culture flasks for generation of tumorspheres.

For in vivo tumor allograft study, 5 female FVB/N mice per group were injected with 2 × 106 live tumorsphere cells pre-treated with DMSO, AZ960, or TG101209 and monitored for tumor growth.

Tumor volume was calculated according to the formula V = 0.5 × A2 × B, where A is the smallest superficial diameter and B is the largest superficial diameter.

For in vivo primary tumor study, female FVB/N mice were hydrodynamically injected with oncogenic forms of Akt (myristoylated Akt) and Δ90Nβ-catenin to generate Akt/β-catenin hepatic tumor.

Mice were subsequently randomized into 3 groups (n = 4) – Vehicle, AZ960 (10 mg/kg), and TG101209 (100 mg/kg) 6 weeks post injection.

Mice were then administered with their respective treatments (AZ960 by intraperitoneal injection and TG101209 by oral gavage) for 4 consecutive weeks (alternate days at 3 times a week) before all the mice were euthanized.

Total liver weight to body weight ratios were recorded as a measurement of tumor burden.

Minimum sample size of mice (n = 4) per treatment group was determined by power analyses based on an expected minimum 2x difference with a 0.5 SD, a power of 80%, and a statistical significance of <0.05.

SECTION

Immunoblot analysis

PARAGRAPH

Cells were lysed in buffer containing 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 1% NP-40 detergent, 0.1% SDS, 0.15 M NaCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH7.4, protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail tablets (Roche).

Equal amounts of protein lysate were resolved by SDS-PAGE and electrotransferred onto PVDF membranes.

Membranes were processed according to standard procedure and proteins were detected using the ImageQuant LAS 500 imaging system.

Antibodies used for immunoblot analyses included active-β-catenin (Millipore), β-catenin (BD Transduction), MDR1 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology), phospho-Akt (Ser473), Akt, phospho-p70 S6 Kinase (Thr389), p70-S6 Kinase, cyclin D1, c-Jun, phospho-Stat3 (Tyr705), Stat3, Caspase 3, PARP, and ABCG2 (Cell Signaling), and β-actin (Sigma).

Additional details on the antibodies are included in Table S2.

SECTION

Side population analysis

PARAGRAPH

Tumor cell suspensions were labeled with Hoechst 33342 dye (Sigma) using the methods described by Goodell et al. with slight modifications.18,27

Briefly, cells (1 × 106 cells/ml) were incubated in pre-warmed DMEM/2% FBS containing freshly added Hoechst 33342 (5 μg/ml) either alone or in the presence of 100 μM verapamil (Sigma) for 90 min at 37 °C with intermittent mixing.

After incubation, cells were spun down at 4 °C and resuspended in HBSS+ (HBSS with 2% FBS and 10 mM HEPES buffer) and stained with FITC-conjugated anti-CD44 antibody (BioLegend) for 30 min on ice.

Cells were then washed with HBSS+, collected by centrifuging for 5 min and resuspended in HBSS+ containing 7-AAD (5 µL/test, STEM CELL™ Technologies), which allows for discrimination of dead versus live cells.

Subsequently, cells were filtered into FACS tubes and analyzed using FACSAria (BD Bioscience).

Hoechst 33342 was excited with the UV laser at 350 nm and its fluorescence was measured with 405/BP30 (Hoechst Blue) and 570/BP20 (Hoechst Red) optical filters.

SP gating was defined based on the fraction of cells that were removed by verapamil treatment.

The percentages of the SP population that were positively stained for CD44 (SP/CD44+), and non-SP that were negative for CD44 (NSP/CD44−), were recorded.

SECTION

Colony formation assay, limiting dilution assay and allograft tumor initiation assay

PARAGRAPH

SP and CD44-positive (SP/CD44+) and non-SP and CD44-negative (NSP/CD44−) tumorspheres were isolated by flow cytometry, and 30 cells were seeded per well in a 96-well cell culture plate, in growth factor-supplemented serum-free DMEM media (Biowest).

The number of colonies formed was counted every 4 days, up to 28 days of growth.

For limiting dilution assay, cells were seeded at densities of 5, 10, 25 and 50 cells per well in 96-well plates, and colony formation was observed every 5 days, up to 20 days of growth.

For allograft tumor initiation, sorted cells were resuspended in supplemented serum-free media with Growth Factor Reduced Matrigel™ (BD Bioscience) in a 1:1 ratio, and injected into the right and left flanks of FVB/N mice.

SP/CD44+ allograft tumors that formed were subsequently harvested and serially passaged in mice for up to 3 generations (P0–P2), as well as subjected to in vitro assays as described above.

SECTION

Immunohistochemistry

PARAGRAPH

Tissues were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) immediately after isolation and embedded in paraffin.

Tissue sections of 4 μm thickness were stained with H&E as well as the following antibodies: β-catenin (BD Transduction), Ki-67 (Millipore), cyclin D1 (Cell Signaling), c-Jun (Cell Signaling), phospho-Akt (Ser473) (Cell Signaling), and phospho-p70 S6 Kinase (Abcam).

SECTION

Fluorescent immunohistochemistry and tissue microarray (TMA) analysis

PARAGRAPH

Two sets of tissue microarrays of human liver cancer patients (OutdoBiotech and Biomax) comprising a total of 118 matched normal adjacent and tumor tissues were subjected to multiplex fluorescent immunohistochemistry based on Opal™ protocol (PerkinElmer).

Briefly, tissues were serially stained with β-catenin primary antibody (BD Transduction) for 1 h followed by HRP-conjugated secondary antibody and tyramide signal amplification (TSA) by FITC (PerkinElmer).

Tissues were subsequently stained with p-Akt primary antibody (Cell Signaling) followed by CD44 (BD Transduction), and the same TSA system was applied for both, using Cyanine 3 (Cy3) and Cyanine 5 (Cy5) as the respective fluorescent stains.

DAPI was used as the nuclear counterstain.

Image acquisition and signal quantification analysis of the tissues were performed using the Vectra® multispectral imaging system and inForm® software (PerkinElmer).

Positive expression was determined by comparing fluorescence intensities of tumor tissues with the respective normal adjacent tissue (NAT).

Low and high expression were determined using the first and third quartile mean intensities, respectively, as thresholds.

SECTION

Viability and sphere assays

PARAGRAPH

Tumorspheres were dissociated into single cells with Accutase™ (Millipore) and seeded into 96-well plates, at 200 cells/µl, with DMEM/F12 medium supplemented with defined growth factors.

Cells were allowed to recover over 2 days before drug treatment.

Cell viability was assessed using alamarBlue® (Serotec) where cells were incubated with 10% culture volume of alamarBlue® for approximately 16 h before reading at absorbance 570 and 600 nm.

Dose response curves were generated using GraphPad Prism (GraphPad Software) and IC50 values were computed.

SECTION

Quantitative real-time PCR

PARAGRAPH

RNA was isolated using TRI Reagent® (Sigma-Aldrich) and reverse transcribed into cDNA using the iScript Reverse Transcription Supermix (Bio-Rad Laboratories) according to the manufacturers’ instructions.

For quantitative real-time PCR, each sample was done in triplicate and subjected to 40 amplification cycles of PCR (Applied Biosystems Prism 7500 sequence detection system).

Primers used were as follows: EPCAM (forward primer, 5′-TTGCTCCAAACTGGCGTCTA-3′; reverse primer, 5′-ACGTGTCTCCGTGTCCTTGT-3′), CD44 (forward primer, 5′-TCCGAATTAGCTGGACACTC-3′; reverse primer, 5′-CCACACCTTCTCCTACTATTGAC-3′), CD90 (forward primer, 5′-ATCCAGCATGAGTTCAGCCT-3′; reverse primer, 5′-ATCCTTGGTGGTGAAGTTGG-3′), CD133 (forward primer, 5′-GAAAAGTTGCTCTGCGAACC-3′; reverse primer, 5′-TCTCAAGCTGAAAAGCAGCA-3′), MDR1 (forward primer, 5′-CCCATCATTGCGATAGCTGG-3′; reverse primer, 5′-TCCAACATATTCGGCTTTAGGC-3′), ABCG2 (forward primer, 5′-GAACTCCAGAGCCGTTAGGAC-3′; reverse primer, 5′-CAGAATAGCATTAAGGCCAGGTT-3′), G6PC (forward primer, 5′-CAGGACTGGTTCATCCTT-3′; reverse primer, 5′-GTTGCTGTAGTAGTCGGT-3′), TAT (forward primer, 5′-ACCTTCAATCCCATCCGA-3′; reverse primer, 5′-TCCCGACTGGATAGGTA-3′), NANOG (forward primer, 5′-TTCCTCTGAAGACCTGCCTCT-3′; reverse primer, 5′-ATCTGCTGGAGGCTGAGGTA-3′), POU5F1 (forward primer, 5′-TGGACACCTGGCTTCAGACTT-3′; reverse primer, 5′-ATCCCTCCGCAGAACTCGTAT-3′) and GAPDH (forward primer, 5′-TGTGAACGGATTTGGCCGTAT-3′; reverse primer, 5′-ACAAGCTTCCCATTCTCGGC-3′).

The level of gene expression was determined using GAPDH as the normalizer gene and expressed as mean ± SEM of the triplicate PCR reactions.

SECTION

Cell cycle analysis

PARAGRAPH

Cells were first treated with AZ960, TG101209 or DMSO for 48 h, then harvested and washed with cold PBS, followed by overnight fixation with ice-cold 70% ethanol.

Cells were then incubated with RNase A (100 μg/ml) and propidium iodide (PI, 50 μg/ml) for 10 min.

Cell cycle distribution was assessed by DNA content using flow cytometry (BD LSRII, BD Biosciences), and analysis was done using FlowJo software.

SECTION

Drug treatment using small molecule inhibitor

PARAGRAPH

Tumorspheres were dissociated with Accutase™ (Millipore) and seeded into 96-well plates at a density of 5,000 cells per well.

Cells were allowed to adhere and recover for 24 h prior to drug treatment.

Thereafter, cells were subjected to 1 μM of each drug from the stem cell inhibitor library (SelleckChem).

The drug treatment was executed by the liquid handling system, MiniJanus (Perkin Elmer).

The drugs were diluted in media to a concentration of 20 μM before dispensing the drugs into master plates containing the respective media to a final concentration of 1 μM by the MiniJanus system.

Thereafter, the library of drugs at 1 μM were added to the plates containing the respective cells and incubated for 24 h.

SECTION

Statistical analysis

PARAGRAPH

All experimental data were performed in at least triplicates (unless otherwise stated), the results averaged, and the SD or SEM calculated.

Unpaired 2-tailed Student's t test was used for statistical comparison of 2 different independent groups.

Kaplan-Meier survival curves were compared using log-rank (Mantel-Cox) test.

Pearson correlation coefficient was computed to assess the relationship between the expression levels of 2 proteins.

p <0.05 was accepted as statistically significant.

SECTION

Results

SECTION

Tumorspheres derived from Akt/β-catenin-driven tumors demonstrate cancer cells with stemness properties

PARAGRAPH

To assess the potential role of the cooperation of Wnt/β-catenin and Akt/mTOR signaling during hepatogenesis, we used a previously reported hepatic tumor mouse model, Akt/β-catenin, using a SB transposon hydrodynamic transfection system.23

Specifically, we co-inject the oncogenic forms of human AKT1 and constitutively active Δ90β-catenin into 6- to 8-week-old wild-type FVB/N mice.

This procedure leads to the formation of high HCC tumor burden in both male and female FVB/N mice with 100% penetrance (Fig. S1A).

We showed that FVB/N mice displayed perimoribund liver tumor burden after 90 days (Fig. 1Ai) post hydrodynamic transfection with the oncogenes.

The gross morphology of the tumors presented was multifocal with more than 100 nodules.

Compared with the pT3-empty control, the histology of Akt/β-catenin tumors revealed distinct HCC-like morphological patterns (Fig. 1Aii).

HCC-like areas were composed of large cells with large nuclei, coarse chromatin, prominent nucleoli, and granular eosinophilic cytoplasm.

In addition, the tumors had a high mitotic rate as measured by the Ki-67 staining (Fig. 1Aiii).

PARAGRAPH

To confirm the presence of Wnt/β-catenin and Akt/mTOR pathway activation, we stained for β-catenin and phosphorylated Akt.

β-catenin staining demonstrated both cytoplasmic and distinct nuclear staining, a key hallmark of active Wnt/β-catenin signaling (Fig. S1B).

In addition, we also demonstrated that downstream targets of the Wnt/β-catenin (c-jun and cyclin D1) were also upregulated compared to the pT3-empty control group.

Next, we performed an immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis with an antibody against phosphorylated Ser473 of Akt to recognize the active forms of all 3 Akt isoforms and verified the presence of high levels of phosphorylated Akt (p-Akt, Ser473) in Akt/β-catenin-driven tumor cells (Fig. S1B).

High levels of phosphorylated p70S6K (p-p70S6K, Thr389), a downstream target of Akt, were also observed in these tumors (Fig. S1B).

These tumors are also homogeneously immunoreactive for HA-tagged myr-Akt and Myc-tagged Δ90Nβ-catenin, indicating their origin from doubly transfected cells (Fig. S1C).

Immunoblot analysis confirmed the activation of both Wnt/β-catenin and Akt/mTOR pathways in these tumors (Fig. 1B).

To demonstrate that both constitutively active Akt and mutant β-catenin are driving the tumorigenicity of Akt/β-catenin tumors, we isolated the primary tumors and subcutaneously injected the tissues into the allograft recipients.

We showed that the allograft tumors formed were further enriched for the expression of nuclear β-catenin, p-Akt and their respective downstream targets (Fig. 1B), suggesting that both Akt/mTOR and Wnt/β-catenin play a key role in driving the tumorigenesis of HCC.

PARAGRAPH

Recent studies suggest that the heterogeneity and the maintenance of HCC tumors are attributed to a small subset of CCSPs.

To identify and enrich for the CCSP population in the Akt/β-catenin tumors, we employed the use of SP analysis using Hoechst 33342 dye efflux and several commonly used HCC CCSP markers, in particular CD44, CD90 and EpCAM.

We isolated and grew tumor spheroids (tumorspheres) derived from Akt/β-catenin tumors.

These Akt/β-catenin tumorspheres could be grown and passaged in serum-free medium supplemented with defined growth factors (Fig. 1Ci).

We showed that tumorspheres derived from Akt/β-catenin tumors maintained a high expression of p-Akt and β-catenin in vitro (Fig. 1Cii).

More importantly, we are able to serially passage these tumorspheres in vitro and maintain these tumors subcutaneously in mouse allografts for more than 10 passages, demonstrating the tumorigenicity of these cells (Fig. 1D).

PARAGRAPH

To determine the expression levels of commonly used HCC CCSP markers, we first performed quantitative real-time PCR and protein expression analysis on Akt/β-catenin primary tumors and their derived tumorspheres.

We showed high mRNA expression of CD44 and CD90, but not EPCAM and CD133 in both the primary tumors and the tumorspheres compared to their pT3-empty control counterparts (Fig. S2).

Flow cytometry analysis of these HCC CCSP markers demonstrated that only CD44, but not CD90 and EpCAM was consistently highly enriched in the Akt/β-catenin tumorspheres compared to the primary tumors from which they were derived (Fig. 1E).

In addition, SP analysis with Hoechst 33342 demonstrated that Akt/β-catenin primary tumors and their derived tumorspheres contained SP fractions of 0.26% and 24.7%, respectively (Fig. 1F), further demonstrating that Akt/β-catenin tumorspheres have an enriched cellular fraction of SP-like tumorigenic cells.

In addition, we also observed an increase of several key stemness markers such as POU5F1 and NANOG and the decrease in the expression of common hepatocyte differentiation markers such as tyrosine aminotransferase (TAT) and glucose-6-phosphatase (G6PC) in both the Akt/β-catenin tumors and tumorspheres (Fig. S2).

These data suggest that Akt/β-catenin tumorspheres derived from the Akt/β-catenin tumors are enriched with CCSP-like and tumor-propagating properties.

SECTION

Co-activation of Wnt/β-catenin and Akt/mTOR signaling portends poorer survival in patients with HCC

PARAGRAPH

To demonstrate the clinical relevance of studying the co-expression of β-catenin and p-Akt (Ser473), we conducted multispectral fluorescent imaging on tissue microarrays (TMAs) consisting of 118 patients with HCC.

Using the matched NAT from each patient as a control, we showed that 23.7% and 21.2% of these patients expressed only β-catenin and p-Akt (Ser473), respectively.

Co-activation of both β-catenin and p-Akt were observed in 14.4% of the cases (Fig. 2A).

Not surprisingly, our results showed that intracellular localization of β-catenin in patient tumor tissues was heterogeneous, with 13% displaying membranous β-catenin staining, 18% with both membranous and cytoplasmic staining, 16% showing both nuclear and cytoplasmic staining, and 49% with membranous, nuclear and cytoplasmic staining (Fig. 2B).

In contrast, β-catenin expression in the NAT was either absent or present only on the membrane (Fig. 2C).

More importantly, Kaplan-Meier survival analysis demonstrated that patients with co-expression of both β-catenin and p-Akt (Ser473) have the worst overall survival with a median survival of 9 months compared to the other groups individually (Fig. 2D).

Interestingly, when we stratified these 118 patients with HCC according to their tumor stages, we observed that both high β-catenin and p-Akt co-expression can predict poorer prognosis only amongst the stage 3 patients (Fig. 2E).

Specifically, p-Akt expression alone did not stratify for survival in patients with stage 1 and stage 2 HCC.

Log-rank (Mantel-Cox) analysis of the Kaplan-Meier survival curves for stage 1 and stage 2 patients, based on p-Akt expression, generated p values of 0.3173 and 0.8891, respectively (Fig. 2Ei).

On the other hand, p-Akt expression in patients with stage 3 HCC showed significant survival stratification with log-rank p values of 0.0115.

The prognostic value of p-Akt has previously been reported by Schmitz et al. where they showed increased p-Akt expression to be associated with overall poorer survival in patients with HCC.28

In addition, p‐Akt has been demonstrated as a risk factor for early disease recurrence and poor prognosis by Nakanishi and colleagues, suggesting the involvement of Akt activation in the progression of HCC.29

Similarly, we observed that β-catenin expression did not stratify for patient survival at clinical stages 1 and 2, with log-rank p values of 0.3173 and 0.2872, respectively (Fig. 2Eii).

Kaplan-Meier survival curves of tumor stage stratified patients expressing high β-catenin versus low β-catenin showed significant survival stratification for patients with stage 3 HCC, with a log-rank p value of 0.0058.

This is consistent with a previous study by Inagawa et al. where they showed that β-catenin expression only correlated with poorer survival of patients with HCC in those with grade 3 but not grades 1 and 2 tumors, suggesting that β-catenin expression is an indicator of poorer prognosis in high grade HCC tumors.30

This is also consistent with an earlier study by Kondo et al. which demonstrated β-catenin accumulation and mutations to be associated with late events in malignant hepatocarcinogenesis.31

Collectively, these data indicate that both Wnt and Akt pathways are important for the progression into late tumor stages of the disease.

Our study demonstrates the clinical relevance of studying co-activation of both Wnt/β-catenin and Akt/mTOR signaling in patients with HCC.

SECTION

Side population in Akt/β-catenin-driven tumors is mediated through MDR1 transporter

PARAGRAPH

As previous studies have shown that both the ABCG2 and MDR1 drug transporter proteins are able to efflux Hoechst 33342 dye,32,33 we next determined which of these 2 transporters play a key role in mediating the SP phenotype of Akt/β-catenin tumorspheres.

Interestingly, we showed that MDR1 but not ABCG2 was significantly overexpressed in these Akt/β-catenin tumorspheres compared to the matched normal liver and the primary tumor (Fig. 3A).

Importantly, we also observed a similarly high enrichment of MDR1 expression in tumorspheres by immunoblot analysis (Fig. 3B), further suggesting the role of CCSP-like cells in mediating the chemoresistance phenotype in these tumors.

To verify that the SP is specifically mediated through the MDR1 transporter, we used specific drug transporter inhibitors fumitremorgin C and Ko143 (ABCG2 transporter inhibitors), or tariquidar and verapamil (MDR1 transporter inhibitors), and demonstrated that only tariquidar and verapamil treatment can inhibit the SP phenotype of these cells (Fig. 3C).

Collectively, our data suggest that the SP phenotype of Akt/β-catenin tumorspheres was primarily mediated through the MDR1 drug transporter.

SECTION

SP/CD44+ population enriched for a highly tumorigenic population in Akt/β-catenin tumors and tumorspheres

PARAGRAPH

Our initial analysis of the CCSP markers in the Akt/β-catenin tumorspheres showed enriched CD44 expression and the SP phenotype.

To highlight the importance of CCSP-like cells in maintaining the tumorigenicity of the tumors, we flow-sorted SP-positive cells with CD44 expression (SP/CD44+) and non-SP cells with no CD44 expression (NSP/CD44−) and performed long term colony formation assays over a period of 24 days to assess the stem cell frequency and self-renewal potential of these subfractions of tumorspheres in vitro at clonal densities.

Specifically, flow-sorted SP/CD44+ and NSP/CD44− cellular fractions were plated at clonal density to allow tumorspheres to arise from single cells as opposed to cellular aggregation.

Our results demonstrated that the SP/CD44+ cells formed significantly more tumorspheres than the NSP/CD44− fraction, suggesting that the SP/CD44+ subfraction is highly enriched for tumorsphere-forming capacity (Fig. 4A).

PARAGRAPH

The ability to recapitulate tumor pathophysiology in an immunocompromised animal model and to serially transplant the tumor provide unequivocal evidence for the definition of CCSPs.34

We flow-sorted these 2 subpopulations of tumorspheres and investigated the tumor-forming ability of each fraction in vivo.

Tumor formation analysis of Akt/β-catenin tumor cells revealed that the SP/CD44+ subfraction was able to form tumors from 1,000 cells (5/5 animals) (Fig. 4B, Table 1).

This is in contrast with the NSP/CD44− fraction, in which no tumor formation was observed (0/5).

More importantly, we could demonstrate the maintenance and high tumorigenicity of the SP/CD44+ fraction when we flow-sorted tumor cells from these tumors after serial passaging and performed colony formation assay (Fig. 4C, Table 1).

We observed that the SP/CD44+ population had higher tumor reformation capacity compared to their NSP/CD44− counterparts, demonstrating that the self-renewal capacity resides mainly in the SP/CD44+ fraction of the tumorspheres.

PARAGRAPH

Subsequently, we also carried out a limiting dilution analysis on the Akt/β-catenin tumorspheres sorted based on their SP and CD44 profiles to assess the CCSP frequency of these Akt/β-catenin tumorspheres.

We showed significantly higher CCSP frequency in the SP/CD44+ fraction in contrast to the NSP/CD44− fraction from both Akt/β-catenin tumorspheres (Fig. 4Di) and the Akt/β-catenin allograft tumors (Fig. 4Dii).

More importantly, when we analyzed the protein expression of the key components of Wnt/β-catenin and Akt/mTOR pathways, we found increased levels of Δ90β-catenin and p-Akt, as well as their associated downstream effector proteins cyclin D1 and p-p70 S6K, in the SP/CD44+ fraction compared to the NSP/CD44− fraction (Fig. 4E), demonstrating that both pathways are crucial in driving the tumorigenic population marked by SP/CD44+ .

PARAGRAPH

Furthermore, to determine if SP/CD44+ cells are found in human HCC, we analyzed 6 human HCC cell lines (Hep3B, Huh7, LM3, SNU387, SNU398, and SNU449) for the existence of SP/CD44+ CCSP populations via flow cytometry.

While all 6 HCC cell lines showed differential expression of SP and CD44+, we observed that LM3 and SNU449 displayed relatively high SP/CD44+ CCSP populations of 31.52 ± 2.885% and 5.86 ± 3.417%, respectively (Table 2, Fig. S3).

Our observations are consistent with previous studies where high SP and CD44 expression were identified in CCSP-like LM3 cells, suggesting the clinical relevance of studying SP/CD44+ CCSPs.14,35

PARAGRAPH

In addition, we also analyzed the TMA for CD44 expression in different tumor stages via multispectral fluorescent imaging.

We observed that CD44 protein expression showed an increasing trend with tumor stage (Fig. S4A) and is positively correlated with β-catenin and p-Akt expression in patients with later stage HCC.

Specifically, a positive correlation was observed between CD44 expression and p-Akt for all stages of HCC tumors analyzed in the TMA, with higher Pearson correlation coefficient ‘r’ at later tumor stages of 2 and 3 (Fig. S4B).

Interestingly, CD44 expression did not demonstrate a positive correlation with β-catenin in stage 1 tumors (r = −0.5709) and was only positively correlated for stage 2 and 3 HCC, r = 0.2027 and r = 0.1519, respectively (Fig. S4Bi-iii).

These data suggest that both Wnt/β-catenin and Akt/mTOR pathways cooperate in maintaining the stemness properties (CD44 expression) of cancer cells, while also highlighting the clinical relevance of studying SP/CD44+ CCSPs in human HCC.

SECTION

Jak/Stat inhibitors induced apoptosis and cell cycle arrest in Akt/β-catenin tumorspheres

PARAGRAPH

In order to find therapeutic efficacy in mitigating tumor growth in CCSPs, we screened the effect of 81 small molecule inhibitors from a stem cell inhibitor library (SelleckChem) on the Akt/β-catenin tumorspheres cultured in serum-free media.

After incubation for 24 h with the compounds at 1 µM, the viability of cells was determined.

From the screen, we identified 10 drug candidates that potently inhibited the viability of the Akt/β-catenin tumorspheres to less than 50% (Fig. 5A).

Interestingly, we observed that 6 out of the top 10 hits were Jak/Stat pathway inhibitors.

We showed that Akt/β-catenin tumor and tumorspheres contained enrichment of the activated Stat3 protein (Fig. 5Bi).

Moreover, activated Stat3 protein is significantly enriched in the SP/CD44+ fraction of the Akt/β-catenin tumorspheres compared to the NSP/CD44− population (Fig. 5Bii), suggesting that activated Stat3 may play a role in regulating the self-renewing and tumorigenic population of SP/CD44+ cells in Akt/β-catenin tumors.36

PARAGRAPH

Moving forward, we used 2 Jak/Stat inhibitors (TG101209 and AZ960) identified in our initial screen to test their efficacy in the tumorspheres.

Akt/β-catenin tumorspheres treated with TG101209 and AZ960 at their respective IC50 (Fig. 5Ci) showed decreased p-Stat3 levels (Fig. 5Cii).

Interestingly, we also observed a similar reduction of active β-catenin and p-Akt protein levels in the tumorspheres, suggesting the crosstalk of Jak/Stat pathway with Akt and β-catenin pathways.

The reduction of these key signaling components of major survival pathways is accompanied by the increased expression of apoptotic markers (cleaved -p70S6K, -caspase 3, and -PARP) observed in the treated cells (Fig. 5Cii).

In addition, we explored the effects of Jak2 inhibition on cell cycle distribution by flow cytometry.

We showed that tumorspheres treated with AZ960 and TG101209 prominently induced accumulation of cells at the G2/M phase of the cell cycle, with AZ960-treated cells having a higher apoptotic population than TG101209-treated cells (Fig. 5D).

More importantly, Jak/Stat inhibition reduced the CCSP phenotype of the Akt/β-catenin tumorspheres.

Specifically, CD44-positive cells of AZ960- and TG101209-treated Akt/β-catenin tumorspheres significantly decreased to 39.6 ± 0.45% and 29.5 ± 2.31% from 63.9 ± 3.58% in DMSO-treated control cells (Fig. 5Ei).

In addition, AZ960 and TG101209 treatment significantly reduced the proportion of SP cells from 26.3 ± 2.54% to 11.6 ± 0.40% and 6.35 ± 0.53%, respectively, compared to DMSO-treated controls (Fig. 5Eii).

Taken together, our findings suggest that pharmacological inhibition of Jak/Stat activity by small molecule Jak/Stat inhibitors resulted in suppression of cell proliferation and consequent CCSP markers of the tumorspheres.

Our findings support the notion that Jak/Stat may be an effective therapeutic target for HCC treatment.

SECTION

Jak/Stat inhibitors delayed tumor formation and progression of Akt/β-catenin tumors

PARAGRAPH

To confirm the suppression of tumor growth upon Jak2 inhibitor treatment in vivo, we induced Akt/β-catenin tumor allografts into mice subcutaneously by injecting 2 × 106 viable and singly dissociated Akt/β-catenin cells 24 h after treatment with either DMSO, AZ960 or TG101209.

Tumor growth inhibition was then assessed by comparing tumor volumes of vehicle- and Jak/Stat inhibitor-treated mice.

All of the DMSO-treated group formed tumors (5/5), whereas 2 out of 5 mice injected formed tumors for AZ960- and TG101209-treated groups.

In addition, tumors that formed from AZ960- and TG101209-treated mice showed a significant reduction in tumor volume compared with vehicle-treated mice (Fig. 6Ai and Aii).

Importantly, immunohistochemistry of tumor tissues from the treated groups showed a significant reduction in p-Stat3 protein levels compared to the vehicle group (Fig. 6Bi and Bii), suggesting that Jak2 inhibition-mediated reductions in tumorigenicity are due to the decreased self-renewal and proliferative potential of tumor cells.

PARAGRAPH

In addition, we performed in vivo treatment on Akt/β-catenin tumors 6 weeks post hydrodynamic injection after the mice displayed moderate tumor burden.

Mice were randomized into 3 different groups (vehicle, AZ960, and TG101209) to receive treatment for up to 4 weeks, at which point, all mice were then euthanized due to high liver tumor burden in the vehicle group (Fig. 6Ci).

We used liver weight to body weight ratio as a measurement of tumor burden in this model.

Specifically, we showed that tumor burden was significantly reduced in AZ960-treated mice compared to the vehicle control (Fig. 6Cii).

TG101209-treated mice did not show a statistically significant lower tumor burden, but nevertheless displayed a moderate reduction in tumor burden with a mean reduction in liver weight to body weight ratio of 1.56-fold compared to vehicle control.

More importantly, we demonstrated that AZ960-treated mice displayed a significant reduction in p-Stat3 levels with concomitant reduction in the Ki-67 proliferative index.

(Fig. 6Ciii, Fig. S5).

These data suggest that the decrease in tumor burden might be contributed to, in part, by the decrease in p-Stat3 and Ki-67 levels.

PARAGRAPH

More importantly, when we analyzed the SP/CD44+ subpopulation of cells by flow cytometry after in vivo drug treatment, we showed a significant reduction of SP/CD44+ cells in AZ960- and TG101209-treated groups compared to the vehicle-treated group.

Specifically, SP/CD44+ cells of AZ960- and TG101209-treated Akt/β-catenin primary tumors significantly decreased to 0.116 ± 0.171% and 0.142 ± 0.283%, respectively, from 0.618 ± 0.242% in the vehicle-treated group (Table S1).

These data suggest that Jak/Stat inhibition reduces the SP/CD44+ CCSPs in the Akt/β-catenin tumors.

PARAGRAPH

Collectively, our data suggest the importance of Jak/Stat signaling crosstalk with Akt and β-catenin signaling pathways and the feasibility of using Jak/Stat inhibitors in the suppression of Akt/β-catenin-driven tumors.

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

HCC continues to remain a cancer that is difficult to treat and typically has a poor prognosis.

Surgical resection and liver transplantation are often limited to a small proportion of patients due to late presentation and more importantly, the resistance to conventional chemotherapy and high recurrence rate.

The development of cancer recurrence is often attributed to the presence of CCSPs, a unique population of cancer cells that possess the ability to self-renew and proliferate extensively.

Therefore, therapeutics targeting CCSPs are currently considered important for the effective treatment of liver cancers.

PARAGRAPH

Our study provides insights into the tumorigenic population that can maintain liver tumor propagation and therapeutically targetable pathways that control these cells.

Specific pathways that regulate stem cell maintenance are logical targets for anti-cancer stem cell directed therapies.

Activation of Akt/β-catenin pathways leads to an enrichment of SP and CD44 expressing (SP/CD44+) HCC tumor cells.

In addition, SP/CD44+ tumor cells demonstrated higher tumor-initiating properties, including self-renewal and tumorigenicity compared to NSP/CD44− counterparts.

The potential for inhibition of the Akt and β-catenin pathways to target CCSPs is supported by the known involvement of these pathways in tumorigenesis and normal stem cell biology in HCC.37

PARAGRAPH

Some of the most prevalent molecular alterations of HCC occur in the Wnt/β-catenin and Akt/mTOR pathways.

Using comprehensive genomic sequencing, Wnt/β-catenin pathway-related molecular alterations have been shown to occur in more than 60% of all HCC cases.38

Interestingly, Wnt/β-catenin pathway alterations have been linked to CCSPs expressing surface markers such as CD133+, EpCAM, and Lgr5, demonstrating their importance in maintaining the CCSP phenotype.20,39,40

Akt phosphorylation, and its subsequent activation, has been implicated in early onset HCC and is associated with poorer prognosis.29

Since constitutive activation of the Akt/mTOR pathway is a major determinant of tumor growth and survival in various solid tumors, it serves as an attractive target for tumor inhibition.

In addition, molecular classification of HCC identified 6 subgroups of which G1/G2 subgroup showed Akt activation.41

Multiple lines of evidence suggest that Akt activation in CCSPs is a key mechanism by which CCSPs mediate chemoresistance, a common hallmark of CCSPs.

Akt appears to be able to drive chemoresistance through several mechanisms, including upregulation of drug transporter proteins as well as pro-survival pathways, including the Bcl-2 pathway.21,42

While activation of the PI3 kinase pathway, which includes activation of Akt, has been shown to increase ABCG2-driven SP+ glioma tumor-initiating CCSPs,43 this study provides evidence that MDR1 and not ABCG2 drives the SP phenotype in Akt/β-catenin-driven tumors.

Beyond upregulation of specific drug transporter and pro-survival proteins, there may be other unknown mechanisms of chemoresistance driven by Akt that remain to be discovered.

Differences in these molecular mechanisms of chemoresistance are likely regulated by cancer type as well as co-activation of other signaling pathways, such as β-catenin.

Regardless, identifying therapeutic methods that can effectively treat CCSPs that are commonly resistant to standard therapies is an attractive approach for improving treatment options against HCC.

PARAGRAPH

Interestingly, our results showed that Jak/Stat pathway inhibition may be effective in impairing growth of Akt/β-catenin-driven tumors, suggesting that the Jak/Stat pathway is at the crossroad between both Akt/mTOR and Wnt/β-catenin pathways.

Activated STAT3 is commonly observed across a wide range of patients with HCC, but the mechanisms by which STAT3 is activated in HCC are largely unknown beyond hepatitis virus infection, NF-κb activation and induction of IL-6.44–46

Furthermore, it has been shown that uncontrolled activation of the Jak/Stat pathway is a dominant oncogenic event in human HCC tumorigenesis.47

Recent studies by Yokogami et al. observed that using an mTOR inhibitor, rapamycin, can reduce the transcriptional activity of Stat3.48

Furthermore, loss of TSC1/2 which activates mTORC1 can lead to increased Stat3 phosphorylation.49,50

Activation of Wnt/β-catenin has also been shown to lead to upregulation and activation of Stat3 in embryonic stem cells.51

In addition, the Wnt3a ligand can also induce Stat3 activation and nuclear translocation.52

In contrast, depletion of β-catenin in anaplastic large cell lymphoma led to a significant reduction of total and active Stat3 levels.53

More importantly, a recent study by Dhar et al. showed the induction of CD44 expression in pericentral hepatocytes via recruitment of Stat3 to the CD44 promoter in a diethylnitrosamine-induced HCC mouse model, further supporting our observations that CD44 is a key tumor-initiating marker and that Jak/Stat inhibitors have potential as a therapeutic strategy against HCC.54

Stat3 regulates a multitude of cellular processes both in normal and neoplastic conditions and its aberrant activation leads to tumorigenesis by upregulating survival, angiogenesis, metastasis and immune evasion.

PARAGRAPH

There have been multiple studies implicating the targeting of the aberrant Stat3 oncogenic pathway as a viable option for eradicating cancer stem-like cells at the root.

For instance, the Jak/Stat3 pathway has previously been implicated in a subset of CD133+ and ALDH+ cancer stem-like cells in specimens from patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).

Shao and colleagues demonstrated that Jak/Stat inhibition downregulated the ability of NSCLC stem cells to self-renew, suggesting that the Stat3 pathway is required to maintain NSCLC stem cells.55

In addition, prostate cancer stem-like cells have also been demonstrated to constitutively activate Jak/Stat signaling, as determined by their activated Stat3 expression in these cells.56

Blocking Stat3 activity with IL-6 antibody or small molecule inhibitor LLL12 reduced colony forming ability and tumorigenicity, suggesting that p-Stat3 activity is required in these prostate cancer stem-like cells.

More recently, Dolatabadi et al. described a subset of cancer stem cells in myxoid liposarcoma with activated Jak/Stat signaling.57

Pharmacological inhibition using Ruxolitinib, a Jak/Stat inhibitor, decreased p-Stat3 and the number of cancer stem cells via the SWI/SNF complex, which acts as a chromatin remodeling system known to regulate stem cell properties through Stat3.

These studies support the findings that Jak/Stat signaling is activated in a subset of solid cancers and suggest the use of Jak/Stat inhibitors in mitigating cancer stem-like cells.

PARAGRAPH

In conclusion, we established the clinical relevance of studying Akt/β-catenin pathway activation and demonstrated that Akt/β-catenin tumors contained a subpopulation of tumor-initiating cells with stem/progenitor-like characteristics that may contribute to tumor self-renewal and drug resistance.

More importantly, this study demonstrated that inhibition of the Jak/Stat pathway may be an alternative method to overcome drug resistance and effectively treat Akt/β-catenin-driven HCC tumors.

SECTION

Abbreviations

PARAGRAPH

CCSP, cancer cells with stemness properties; HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma; NAT, normal adjacent tissue; NSCLC, non-small cell lung cancer; NSP, non-side population; SB, Sleeping beauty; SP, side population; TSA, tyramide signal amplification.

SECTION

Financial support

PARAGRAPH

This study is supported by the National Research Foundation Cancer Science Institute of Singapore RCE Main Grant and Ministry of Education Academic Research Fund (MOE AcRF Tier 2 MOE2015-T2-2-126).

SECTION

Conflict of interest

PARAGRAPH

The authors have no potential conflicts of interest to disclose.

PARAGRAPH

Please refer to the accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.

SECTION

Authors’ contributions

PARAGRAPH

T.B. Toh and E.K-H.

Chow designed the experiments.

T.B. Toh, J.J. Lim, M.B.M.A. Rashid and L. Hooi performed the experiments.

T.B. Toh, J.J. Lim and E.K-H.

Chow analyzed the data.

T.B. Toh and J.J. Lim wrote the manuscript.

T.B. Toh and E.K-H.

Chow supervised the study.