10.1016/j.jasrep.2018.09.020

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Distinguishing stone age drilling techniques on ostrich eggshell beads: An experimental approach

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Although it is impossible to know their precise meaning to those who made and wore them, archaeological beads were likely signals of status, prestige and beauty, as they are in contemporary societies.

Beads first appeared in the archaeological record as non-standardized perforated aquatic shells that are thought to have been strung and worn suspended on the body (e.g., d'Errico et al., 2009; Henshilwood, 2007).

The first deliberately shaped, standardized ornaments are ostrich eggshell (OES) beads that date to the end of the Middle Stone Age (MSA) (Miller and Willoughby, 2014), and which subsequently became common during the Later Stone Age (LSA) of eastern and southern Africa.

While beads hold great scholarly significance because of what they represent in terms of human cognition and sociality they are also the products of a complex technological process, which is itself worthy of study.

PARAGRAPH

The manufacture process of OES beads can be organized by archaeologists in a number of ways.

One of the most common systems involves determining whether the shell was perforated prior to the shaping of the bead's exterior or after, otherwise known as Pathways 1 and 2, respectively (Orton, 2008).

The actual act of perforating the shell, on the other hand, has received less attention.

In theory, the perforation of OES can be accomplished using a variety of techniques including pecking (repeatedly tapping the OES with an implement), gouging (pressing an implement into the OES and using a scooping motion to scrape away the surface) or punching (using a small number of directed blows with significant force to push an implement through the OES).

However, personal observation by JM indicates that the vast majority of Stone Age OES beads show evidence of rotary drilling, which involves rotating a sharp implement of some kind against the shell.

PARAGRAPH

This article will therefore focus on the two forms of rotary drilling that are well known from ethnographic accounts of OES bead-making and Stone Age artifacts.

The first form involves manually twisting the drill bit which is held in the hand, while the second relies on a rapidly rotating a hafted drill (e.g. Wingfield, 2003; Hitchcock, 2012; Marshall, 1976; Schapera, 1965; Stow, 1905).

Unlike hand-drilling, we demonstrate that hafted-drilling is highly efficient and those equipped with this technology would have been able to drill large numbers of beads very quickly.

The introduction of such specialized technology may have had important social implications such as the concentration of social capital amongst select groups or the establishment of craft specialists.

PARAGRAPH

Nevertheless, the precise origins of hafted-drilling are unknown.

In Africa and the Near East it is assumed to have been present by the early Holocene/late Pleistocene (Gorelick and Gwinnett, 1990; Gwinnett and Gorelick, 1998; Wright et al., 2008), while in China, Yang et al. (2016) have identified hafted-drilled beads dating to the early Holocene from the Shuidonggou site (see also Wei et al., 2017).

Even so, it is possible that this technique has a much greater time depth, as both rotary-drilled OES beads and hafted tools originated much earlier in the MSA.

It is also unclear which social, environmental and historical conditions might have stimulated the development and adoption of hafted-drilling.

Resolving these questions would provide valuable insight into Stone Age technology and social life.

However, many of the necessary analytical methods are either absent or lacking solid experimental validation.

PARAGRAPH

Some experimental research has been devoted to the study of drilling, while only a few studies have examined the rotary drill impressions left on beads.

Much of the existing literature has instead focused on the micro-wear traces left on experimental drill bits (e.g. Beyin, 2010; Coșkunsu, 2009; Kenoyer and Vidale, 1992; Unger-Hamilton et al., 1987; Yerkes, 1983).

Other studies have attempted to replicate archaeological techniques by experimentally punch-piercing aquatic shells (e.g. d'Errico et al., 2005; Stiner et al., 2013; Tátá et al., 2014), and others have analyzed the efficiency of drilling with respect to variables like lithic material and shell heating (e.g. Arnold and Rachal, 2002; Nigra and Arnold, 2013).

Only a handful of experiments have directly addressed the difference in aperture characteristics between beads drilled by a bit held in the hand and beads drilled with a composite tool such as a bow drill.

These projects generally report that hand-turned perforations are irregular with asymmetrical/eccentric apertures (Coșkunsu, 2009; Gwinnett and Gorelick, 1991; Yang et al., 2016; Yerkes, 1983).

Other characteristics which suggest hand drilling include the formation of striations that do not form complete circles (Coșkunsu, 2009), the presence of a notch within the aperture (Gwinnett and Gorelick, 1991), and the presence of “waving/fluting” inside the aperture (Yang et al., 2016).

PARAGRAPH

This study builds upon previous work in a number of important ways.

Firstly, most existing research relies upon a semi-systematic visual survey of the bead aperture, usually in conjunction with informal experimentation.

While we do not doubt the value of such observations, these methods of bead differentiation are in some part subjective and rely largely on the skill of the analyst to be successful.

Their comparability is also limited by a lack of standardized language to describe aperture characteristics.

Perhaps most concerning, a blind testing program of bead drilling techniques has not been published, so it is uncertain how well these studies are actually able to predict drilling type.

In any analytical field, particularly one that relies on subjective judgement, the importance of testing to validate potential methods cannot be understated (Eren et al., 2016; Evans, 2014).

By making our results available this study provides a much needed experimental underpinning for existing and future research.

PARAGRAPH

Secondly, we believe that dialogue between researchers could be improved by an attempt to systematize the language that is used to describe the anatomy of bead perforations.

Having reviewed the literature, we therefore propose a synthesis of some terms that we hope will permit a more nuanced and mutually intelligible conversation about bead technology.

We also supplement descriptions of features with detailed images to help limit uncertainty.

PARAGRAPH

Thirdly, we present a statistical model capable of predicting drilling technique for OES beads on the basis of a short list of binary attributes.

The method does not require expensive technology, and takes only a few minutes of assessment per bead, allowing for the analysis of a large sample.

It also reveals the predictive power of these different attributes as they relate to drilling type.

Perhaps most importantly, this method limits the subjectivity involved in visually distinguishing drilling types (though does not eliminate it entirely), increasing comparability and confidence.

SECTION

Materials and methods

SECTION

Terminology

PARAGRAPH

Many disciplines within archaeology struggle with the challenge of effectively communicating research findings.

The study of beads and bead-making is no different in this respect, and terms vary considerably between publications and sometimes lack precise definitions.

Having reviewed earlier work on OES bead analysis (e.g., Jacobson, 1987a, 1987b; Kandel and Conard, 2005; Orton, 2008; Orton et al., 2005; Plug, 1982; Sadr et al., 2003; Smith et al., 1991, 2001; Wang et al., 2009; Yang et al., 2016; Yates, 1995) we present the following terms: aperture, cup, position of restriction, cup perimeter and cup perimeter area (see Fig. 1).

The aperture refers generally to the area through which the shell is perforated; it encompasses all of the following features.

The cup is the passage between the inner and outer table of the shell.

It may have gently concaved sidewalls that widen towards the shell surface from which drilling was initiated, resembling the profile of a teacup.

The narrowest point of the aperture is the position of restriction, which is often located at the point where the drill breaks through the opposite surface of the shell.

Often the widest portion of the cup is found on the shell surface from which drilling originated, which we refer to here as the cup perimeter.

The cup perimeter area refers to the area of the roughly circular polygon enclosed by the cup perimeter.

PARAGRAPH

The expression of the features described above is influenced by a number of factors including drilling technology, the intention of the bead-maker and use-wear.

Apertures drilled solely from the inner surface of the shell tend to have a conical cup shape, a cup perimeter present on the inner surface, and a position of restriction near to the outer surface.

Shells drilled from both faces effectively have two cups and two cup perimeters but a single position of restriction.

While the shape of the cup is most often conical, its shape may vary for several reasons.

One of the primary determinants of cup shape is the profile of the drill.

Cylindrically shaped cups are most often the product of a narrow parallel-sided drill bit, while a drill bit that tapers to a point will tend to produce a flaring cup shape that widens towards the location at which drilling was initiated.

The act of suspending the bead on a length of string may similarly produce a cylindrical cup shape as the aperture wears.

In these cases, the point of restriction and cup perimeter are theoretically indistinguishable; however, in practice it is almost always possible to determine the direction of drilling, especially on preforms.

For the most part, once beads are strung and worn the traces of drilling become less pronounced and more difficult to identify as the soft inner surface of the OES wears down over time, blurring the cup perimeter.

The position of restriction also grows wider from wear over time.

It is therefore important to be aware of, and to account for, such factors in any analysis of drilling technology based on these attributes.

PARAGRAPH

For this experiment rotary drilling was divided into two categories: complete rotation and incomplete rotation (Fig. 2).

Incomplete rotation occurs when the drill bit is revolved less than 360° in a single pass and then returned to its starting position.

Incomplete rotation is most frequently the byproduct of holding the drill bit in the hand and twisting the wrist back and forth as though turning a key in a lock.

When using this technique, the structure of the hand, wrist and forearm limits the maximum possible angle of rotation to less than 360°, even when the opposite hand, holding the bead, is rotated simultaneously.

Complete rotation is achieved when the drill bit revolves at least 360° in a single turn.

This type of rotation is most often attained by employing a composite tool such as a drill bit affixed to an organic shaft.

The simplest means of attaining complete rotation with this tool configuration is by rolling the handle rapidly between the palms, although the tool may be further enhanced by technologies such as the bow drill or pump drill.

As previously demonstrated by Yerkes (1983), these three complete rotation techniques produce similar aperture characteristics (see also Semenov, 1964, p. 18).

SECTION

Experimental assemblage

PARAGRAPH

To establish a set of variables capable of distinguishing between complete and incomplete rotation drilling, a total of 254 OES beads were produced by student volunteers (incomplete rotation: n = 114; complete rotation: n = 140).

All volunteers were graduate and undergraduate students from the University of Alberta.

The majority of participants were female and none (besides the authors) had any prior experience in manufacturing OES beads or using Stone Age technology.

Each participant was provided with a pointed flake that was large enough to use comfortably in the hand and another flake that was affixed to a wooden dowel.

Both the hand and hafted drills were made from Burlington chert (sourced from Missouri, United States) and were retouched to a point using pressure flaking (all knapping done by JW).

Average drill bit diameter at 2 mm from the tip (the average thickness of OES used in this experiment) was 4.2 mm (SD = 0.59 mm).

The hafted drills were affixed to a wooden dowel using the split stick method, and tape or plastic wrap was sometimes used to further secure the bit to the handle.

Volunteers were also provided with a selection of OES, purchased from an Alberta ostrich farm that was pre-fragmented by the authors into pieces of suitable sizes.

PARAGRAPH

Participants were encouraged to use the drills to perforate the shell in any manner that was comfortable.

Complete preforms were marked with a random number that was keyed to the data base.

We observed two methods of hand-drilling.

For the most part, the bead preform was held stable in the non-dominant hand while the dominant hand operated the drill by applying pressure and twisting.

A variant of this method involved rotating the off-hand in the opposite direction as the lithic drill, so that both the lithic bit and the OES preform were in motion.

The second drilling method involved placing the preform on the table while holding it in place with the off-hand.

Pressure was then applied through the drill, as before, with the dominant hand.

PARAGRAPH

Complete rotation drilling was accomplished, without much significant variation, by placing the bead on the table and aligning the drill bit perpendicular to it.

The dowel was then rolled vigorously between the hands in order to rotate the drill.

We also documented how long it took to perforate each bead to test the relative efficiency of each method.

No abrasive was added in this experiment.

PARAGRAPH

In every case, whether using the hand-drill or the hafted-drill, volunteers intuitively drilled from the soft inner surface of the shell rather than the hard outer surface.

This behaviour is consistent with archaeological and ethnographic examples, and is almost certainly due to the properties of the different layers within an ostrich egg.

The outer surface of an ostrich egg is made up of a thin, but dense cuticle layer, that is water impermeable and smooth (Dauphin et al., 2006; Li-Chan and Kim, 2008).

It can be difficult to begin drilling from this surface as its texture causes the drill bit to slide.

The inner, mammillary layer is softer and chalky making it significantly easier to initiate drilling (Wang et al., 2009).

It has also been suggested that drilling from the inner surface may reduce breakage (Orton, 2008, p. 1767).

SECTION

Statistical model

PARAGRAPH

The first phase of the experiment entailed a detailed visual survey of the experimental materials to assess the degree to which hand turned and hafted techniques leave visibly distinct traces.

These observations combined with JM's experience analyzing similar artifacts and the available literature was used as the basis for predictive statistical modeling.

The visual analysis was conducted by JM using the unaided eye in combination with low magnification (6–10×).

A break-down of the visual survey is presented below (summarized in Table 1).

Refer to Fig. 3 for a visual reference of typical complete and incomplete drilled aperture characteristics.

PARAGRAPH

Overall, complete rotation tends to produce more consistent and well-ordered aperture characteristics.

When visible, striations encircle the entire cup in near perfectly concentric circles.

Striations are also a consistent shallow depth, likely owing to the even distribution of pressure across the cup.

The cup perimeters of beads formed by complete rotation are circular with crisp, well-defined and consistent edges.

Striations and irregular gouges on the inner surface of the shell (i.e. not within the cup) are rare.

The cup walls that result from complete rotation are smooth with few undulations or irregularities.

Lastly, the cup walls often slope gently towards the position of restriction, frequently resembling the profile of a logarithmic curve.

PARAGRAPH

Conversely, irregularities in the aperture's characteristics tend to indicate incomplete rotation.

Striations are not always visible within the cup, but when apparent they are generally non-parallel, of inconsistent depth and width, and may only reach partway around the cup wall.

The cup perimeter shape resulting from incomplete rotation drilling is typically non-circular, skewing towards elliptical, hourglass-shaped or even roughly triangular.

The perimeter silhouette may be jagged or crenelated.

Although portions of the cup perimeter may be easily visible, the remaining sections are often poorly defined.

There may also be a series of semi-circular striations visible on the surface of the shell outside the cup perimeter as a result of incidental contact with the margins of the drill.

The profile of the cup wall may also be bumpy or misshapen, or exhibit a feature that Gwinnett and Gorelick (1991) referred to as a notch.

A notch is a convex protuberance on one of the sidewalls of the otherwise concave cup where the incompletely rotated drill consistently failed to remove a portion of material over repeated passes.

PARAGRAPH

Based on our observations, as well as those of several authors (e.g., Gwinnett and Gorelick, 1991; Yang et al., 2016; Yerkes, 1983), we isolated five different presence or absence attributes thought to collectively discriminate drilling technique.

By clearly reducing these features to binary states we attempt to reduce inter-observer error and increase the replicability of the method.

Attributes are presented as binary choices, listed below.

An affirmative answer is marked with a “1” while a negative answer is marked with a “0”.

The cup perimeter is circular as opposed to oval-shaped or triangular

The cup perimeter is uneven, crenelated or rough and/or there are striations visible on the beads' surface (i.e. outside the cup perimeter)

The cup walls are wavy or undulating, or feature irregularities such as a notch

The cup walls slope towards the position of restriction at equal angles

The cup walls exhibit shallow, parallel striations that encircle the entire cup or a portion of the cup.

PARAGRAPH

Scoring of the aperture attributes was carried out by the authors.

Bead preforms were keyed at the time they were created so that the individual scoring the attributes could not rely on a priori knowledge of the drilling technique used.

Once scored, the attributes were used to create a binary logistic regression model in IBM SPSS v24.

Logistic regression is a statistical technique used to predict group membership on the basis of a number of continuous and/or categorical variables.

The predictive model was created by inputting the binary attribute states for each bead blank as predictor variables along with the correct group membership as the independent variable.

We employed a stepwise model fitting procedure, which uses an automatic process to include or exclude variables in the final model.

We did so to insure that all of the variables we identified significantly improved the functioning of the model.

The software then tested the ability of these predictor variables to collectively differentiate groups (complete vs incomplete rotation) and displayed the number of blanks that it was successfully able to identify.

SPSS also produced scores for each of the predictor variables, indicating their relative predictive power.

It should now be possible in future to apply the predictive model to archaeological data sets for which only the predictor variables are known in order to predict drilling method.

SECTION

Results

PARAGRAPH

Based on our observations of the student volunteers, hand drilled perforations took on average 12.5 min each to create, but this time varied significantly up to a maximum of 30 min (SD = 7.3).

Conversely, rotary-drilled apertures took only 2.25 min, and with far less variation (SD = 1.8), although with experience and a sharp drill bit it is possible to finish an aperture in under 30 s. Note that these values do not include time required to sharpen and maintain tools, or the additional time that would have been required for the final shaping of the bead.

PARAGRAPH

Furthermore, the binary attributes identified in this study were shown to be capable of predicting drilling method with a high degree of accuracy (74.0%) – a 24% increase over the null model of 50% correct (Table 2).

Furthermore, the model was better able to identify complete rotation (79.1% accurate), while incomplete rotation was less successfully identified 67.2% of the time.

All of the variables entered into the equation were significantly associated with the manufacture method and included by the stepwise procedure; although, there were discernible differences in the power of each variable to predict drilling type (Table 3).

The variable with the most predictive power (all other variables held constant) was the evenness of the cup perimeter.

Beads with an even cup perimeter were almost four times more likely to be perforated with a hafted drill bit (Table 4).

On the other hand, the variable with the least predictive power was the presence or absence of irregularities such as a notch within the cup.

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

The adoption of hafted drilling may be related to the rise of craft specialization and the ramping-up of ornament production.

Although it is thought that Holocene producers of OES beads relied on hafted-drilling technology, it is unclear precisely when and where hafted-drilling first emerged (Gorelick and Gwinnett, 1990; Gwinnett and Gorelick, 1998; Wright et al., 2008).

What is certain is that hafted implements and OES beads both originated during the MSA, which makes it possible to speculate that hafted-drilling appeared deeper in the past than currently documented.

If not, how were MSA and LSA beads produced (using incomplete rotary methods?),

and what eventually initiated the shift to hafted-drilling that is evident in later periods?

PARAGRAPH

To begin answering these questions it is necessary to develop and validate methods capable of detecting the archaeological signatures of these respective techniques.

One avenue is to survey sites for possible Stone Age drills/borers which bear traces of OES and hafting wear.

Although Stone Age tools identified as borers have been recovered from a number of African sites they are rare and not often found in association with OES beads (Orton, 2008).

These artifacts are therefore not likely to be reliable proxies for bead making activity, nor do they necessarily imply the use of a particular drilling technique.

Furthermore, many of the components of a hafted drill (such as the wooden shaft, sinew and mastic) do not typically survive well in the archaeological record.

We propose instead that the production signatures left on the beads themselves may be an effective way of reconstructing Stone Age drilling technology when other lines of evidence are absent.

PARAGRAPH

The results of our testing with student volunteers shows that mechanically enhanced drilling is significantly more rapid than hand-drilling.

In short, six bead blanks could be created using a hafted drill-bit in the same time it took to create a single blank with a hand-held bit.

Although these values would likely be different for experienced bead makers we don't expect that repeating the experiment with specialists would overturn our fundamental conclusion that mechanically assisted drilling is faster.

PARAGRAPH

Our results also reinforce earlier research positing that hand-drilling and hafted-drilling produce distinct traces that are reliably identifiable by archaeologists.

By using an attribute based system of feature identification in conjunction with a statistical model it was possible to correctly identify drilling technique in 74.0% of cases.

A more detailed breakdown of the results reveals that the model is better able to identify complete rotation (79.1% accuracy) than incomplete rotation.

This observation is likely due to the greater variation in the manufacture signatures observed on hand-drilled bead blanks.

Nevertheless, there is a notable degree of overlap for many of these characteristics.

While beads at either end of the logit spectrum were easily identifiable, the bulk of our sample fell somewhere in the middle.

It is clear that the aperture characteristics we documented are not mutually exclusive to drilling type and no single variable can predict drilling method with perfect accuracy.

PARAGRAPH

While we feel that our results are promising we encourage further testing of this method, and methods like it, to increase confidence and transparency.

A suggested avenue of research might involve a similar experiment carried out with the assistance of skilled bead makers or ethnographic bead collections.

We suspect that experienced individuals would be able to produce bead blanks faster than novices, irrespective of method.

However, it is not certain what role experience plays in the expression of the aperture characteristics we define in this article.

Ultimately, we hope to engender a greater emphasis on methods that are systematic and quantitative.

SECTION

Conclusion

PARAGRAPH

In addition to their importance as decorative artifacts, OES beads preserve important information about Stone Age drilling technology.

This paper presents three important findings.

Firstly, we propose a set of terms to describe important bead characteristics.

We hope that these terms will help to encourage a more detailed discussion of bead technology and unify the language currently in use.

Secondly, we present quantitative data indicating the accuracy of our method.

As we are not aware of a similar value in the existing literature, these results constitute an important experimental foundation for similar research.

Lastly, we describe a new quantitative method to distinguish bead preforms drilled by a hand-held drill bit versus those made with a hafted drill.

With this work we hope to stimulate further research into the origins of Stone Age drilling techniques, as it pertains the production or ornaments or otherwise.