10.1016/j.jhep.2018.10.018

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Non-invasive response prediction in prophylactic carvedilol therapy for cirrhotic patients with esophageal varices

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Gastroesophageal varices are significant challenges that are commonly faced by patients with cirrhosis.1

Variceal hemorrhage occurs in 10–15% of patients annually depending on the size of varices, the presence of red wale marks, and the severity of liver disease.2

In addition, acute variceal hemorrhage carries significant risks of morbidity and mortality, with reported 6-week mortality rates of 15–25%.3

PARAGRAPH

Primary prophylaxis for variceal hemorrhage using non-selective beta-blockers (NSBBs) has shown efficacy in patients with cirrhosis and high-risk varices.4

Reducing the hepatic venous pressure gradient (HVPG) by NSBBs has been shown to be associated with a decreased risk of variceal hemorrhage and ascites, along with other benefits including amelioration of bacterial translocation and prevention of spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, resulting in positive effects on survival.5–9

However, it is difficult to routinely measure HVPG in cirrhotic patients who receive prophylactic NSBBs in many institutions.

PARAGRAPH

Shortcomings of HVPG measurements, such as invasiveness and expensiveness, have led to numerous studies on non-invasive measurements of portal hypertension in the last decade.

Measurements of liver stiffness (LS) using transient elastography (TE) have proven its accuracy for diagnosing clinically significant portal hypertension.10

In addition, spleen stiffness (SS) measured via TE has recently been suggested as a promising method to assess portal hypertension.11,12

However, measuring SS using TE requires additional ultrasound examination and its measurement feasibility largely depends on the size of the spleen, which limits its wide applicability.

Therefore, newer ultrasound-based elastographic methods have emerged as tools for facilitating SS measurements, including point shear wave elastography such as acoustic radiation force impulse (ARFI) imaging, and 2-dimensional real-time shear wave elastography.

These newer elastographic methods have shown similar accuracy as TE for predicting portal hypertension.13,14

PARAGRAPH

Although elastographic assessments of portal hypertension using the aforementioned technologies have yielded promising data, non-invasively predicting changes in HVPG during NSBB therapy represents an unmet clinical need.

Hence, the aim of this study was to investigate whether non-invasive markers such as LS and SS measurements using ARFI elastography can predict hemodynamic response to NSBBs as primary prophylaxis in cirrhotic patients with high-risk esophageal varices.

SECTION

Patients and methods

PARAGRAPH

The present study was a prospective cohort study which was conducted at a single university-affiliated referral hospital (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01943318).

This proof-of-concept study consisted of 2 parts.

The first part aimed to derive a prediction model for hemodynamic response to NSBBs from the earlier derivation cohort (between May 2013 and February 2016).

The second part was designed as an external validation including more recently recruited patients (between March 2016 and October 2017) at the same institution.15,16

PARAGRAPH

Patients with liver cirrhosis who underwent endoscopic evaluation of gastroesophageal varices and hemodynamic evaluation of portal hypertension were eligible for this study.

Inclusion criteria were the presence of high-risk esophageal varices on upper gastrointestinal endoscopic examination without a history of previous hemorrhage and a baseline HVPG >12 mmHg.

High-risk varices were defined as medium-large varices, small varices with red wale marks or Child-Pugh class C disease.17

PARAGRAPH

Exclusion criteria were as follows: age <18 years; pre- or postsinusoidal causes of portal hypertension; previous history of variceal hemorrhage or endoscopic band ligation (EBL); active alcoholism (noncompliant to abstinence >3 months before enrollment); severe decompensated liver disease (e.g., refractory ascites, uncontrolled hepatic encephalopathy, serum bilirubin >5 mg/dl, international normalized ratio of prothrombin time >2.5, and history of spontaneous bacterial peritonitis); renal insufficiency (serum creatinine >1.5 mg/dl); contraindications to NSBB use (e.g., asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, severe aortic stenosis, brittle diabetes mellitus, and atrioventricular block); presence of portal venous thrombosis; coexistence of malignancies including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC); and patient refusal to participate in the study.

PARAGRAPH

All study participants gave their written informed consent to participate in the study.

The present study was approved by the institutional review board and was conducted according to the ethical guidelines of the World Medical Association Declaration of Helsinki.

SECTION

Carvedilol treatment, measurements of HVPG, liver and spleen stiffness, and follow-up of liver-related events after NSBB prophylaxis

PARAGRAPH

In the derivation cohort, carvedilol (Hoffmann La-Roche, Vienna, Austria) was started at a dose of 6.25 mg/day and titrated to a maximum dose of 25 mg/day in biweekly steps of 6.25 mg until systolic arterial blood pressure was not less than 95 mmHg and heart rate was not less than 50 beats per minute, according to the previously described protocol with minor modifications.18

Compliance with carvedilol therapy was evaluated by monitoring adverse events, blood pressure, and heart rate at each clinical visit.

However, in the validation cohort we used lower doses of carvedilol, with a maximum dose of 12.5 mg/day, because of concerns about worsening arterial hypotension which could be less tolerated by cirrhotic patients.19,20

PARAGRAPH

HVPG was measured according to the standard methodology at baseline (prior to administration of carvedilol) and within 2 weeks of the end of dose titration by an intervention radiologist (YHS with more than 10 years of experience) who was blinded to clinical data, as previously described.21

Hemodynamic response to carvedilol therapy was defined as either a decrease in HVPG by ≥20% of the baseline value or an absolute value of HVPG <12 mmHg after dose titration.17

For non-responders, carvedilol was gradually tapered and permanently discontinued, and prophylactic EBL was implemented.

PARAGRAPH

All patients in the derivation and validation cohorts were followed up every 2–3 months with clinical assessment including adherence to drug and monitoring of heart rate and blood pressure, development of all-cause and portal hypertension-related gastrointestinal bleeding or liver-related events (hepatic decompensation [ascites, spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, and hepatic encephalopathy], mortality or liver transplantation), and laboratory tests.

PARAGRAPH

Ultrasound examination was simultaneously performed using a Siemens Acuson S2000TM ultrasound system (Siemens AG, Erlangen, Germany) at baseline and within 2 weeks of the end of carvedilol dose titration by an expert radiologist (HW with more than 10 years of experience as a sonographer) who was blinded to clinical data, as described elsewhere.22

LS was measured in the right lobe using the 9th to 10th rib intercostal approach, with the right arm in maximum abduction.

SS was measured using the intercostal approach in the left upper quadrant, with the left arm in maximum abduction.

A 10 × 5 mm region of interest box was placed on the liver and spleen parenchyma without large blood vessels or abnormal lesions at a depth of 3 to 5.5 cm below the liver and spleen capsule.

For each patient, 10 repetitive measurements were performed for the liver and spleen while the patient held their breath for a few seconds per measurement.

The median value of the 10 valid measurements was calculated and represented as an LS or SS value.

LS or SS was expressed as shear wave velocity (meters per second, m/s).

Acceptable LS or SS values were defined as the ratio of the interquartile range to the median value ≤30%.23

SECTION

Statistical analysis

PARAGRAPH

For baseline characteristics, continuous variables are expressed as medians and ranges, and categorical variables are expressed as frequencies with percentages.

In the derivation cohort, single binary logistic regression analysis was used to identify relevant features associated with hemodynamic response to carvedilol, in which variables with p <0.1 were subsequently included in the multivariate analysis.

The selected variables for the logistic regression analysis included clinical characteristics, laboratory parameters, LS, and SS.

Forward and backward stepwise selection procedures were sequentially used to select the best-fitted model based on the Akaike information criterion.24

We performed a two-step approach to find the best cut-off value of our model.

First, an optimal cut-off value was determined based on the Youden’s index to maximize both sensitivity and specificity for risk stratification.

Second, we applied several different conditions to emphasize either sensitivity or specificity, because the determination of a single definitive cut-off value based on the maximal Youden’s index for this prediction model might be less appropriate given the proof-of-concept nature of this study.25.

Next, the predictive performance of the final model was confirmed based on the areas under the receiver-operating characteristic curves (AUCs) and calibration plots.

The model was internally validated and optimized with bootstrapping.26

For internal validation of the predictive model, 3-fold cross-validation was performed.

We examined goodness of fit of the logistic regression model by comparing the observed response with the expected response estimated from the risk score and performing a Hosmer-Lemeshow test.

Finally, we externally validated the performance of the prediction model as described.

Outcomes such as rates of gastrointestinal hemorrhage and hepatic decompensation, and liver transplantation-free survival were estimated using the Kaplan–Meier method and compared by log-rank test.

In addition, we also compared cumulative incidence rates of liver-related outcomes considering death or liver transplantation as competing risks.

PARAGRAPH

All tests were based on 2-sided probability, and p <0.05 was considered statistically significant.

All statistical analyses were performed with R language ver.

3.1.1 (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria).

SECTION

Results

SECTION

Baseline patient characteristics and hemodynamic response to carvedilol therapy in the derivation cohort

PARAGRAPH

In the derivation cohort, 153 consecutive patients with cirrhosis and esophageal varices were evaluated for eligibility.

Among them, 47 patients were excluded for the following reasons: noncompliance to alcohol abstinence (n = 18); discontinuation of medication due to adverse events (n = 15); loss to follow-up (n = 9); development of HCC (n = 4); and liver transplantation (n = 1).

Finally, 106 patients completed paired measurements of HVPG and were included in this study.

Measurement of SS was unsuccessful in 3 patients: because of previous splenectomy in 1 patient and because of anatomical difficulty in measurement in the other 2 patients.

However, these patients were excluded due to noncompliance with alcohol abstinence or carvedilol-related adverse events.

LS measurements were successful in all study participants.

Finally, a total of 106 patients completed paired LS and SS measurements.

Flowcharts for patient selection are depicted (Fig. 1A).

PARAGRAPH

The baseline characteristics of the derivation and validation cohorts are summarized (Table 1).

The mean age of the enrolled patients was 59 years, and 75 patients were male (70.8%).

The primary etiologies of cirrhosis were alcohol (42.5%) and viral (hepatitis B, 31.1%; hepatitis C, 11.3%).

The mean model for end-stage liver disease (MELD) score was 9.51.

At baseline, 84 patients (79.2%) had medium- or large-sized esophageal varices, and 66 patients (62.3%) had red wale marks.

Six patients with small varices received prophylactic carvedilol because they were Child-Pugh class C. Baseline HVPG was 19.6 ± 5.8 mmHg.

ARFI-measured LS and SS were 2.44 ± 0.69 m/s and 3.14 ± 0.45 m/s, respectively.

PARAGRAPH

Following the median duration of 13.2 weeks (IQR 10.3–17.2) for dose titration of carvedilol toward the maximum tolerated dose, the follow-up HVPG was measured in each study participant.

Hemodynamic response was observed in 59 patients (55.7%) at a median 25 mg of carvedilol.

A high dose (25 mg or higher; n = 64) was administered to patients with Child-Pugh class A disease (n = 52, 81.3%) and those with preexisting arterial hypertension (n = 12, 19.7%).

There were no significant differences in the changes in HVPG (p = 0.918) or hemodynamic response rates between the low-dose (≤12.5 mg; 23/42) and high-dose (≥25 mg; 36/64) groups (p = 0.777).

Baseline demographic and clinical characteristics were not significantly different between hemodynamic responders and non-responders, including HVPG, SS, and spleen length (Table 1), although the baseline LS tended to be marginally higher in non-responders (p = 0.066).

The changes in the hemodynamic parameters between baseline and follow-up after carvedilol therapy are presented (Table 2).

Hemodynamic responders had significantly lower LS and SS at follow-up than non-responders.

However, blood pressure, heart rate, and spleen length were not significantly different between the 2 groups.

The individual patient data on the absolute changes in HVPG, LS and SS stratified by the response group are shown (Fig. 2A-C).

A significant reduction in LS was observed in the responders (p = 0.010) compared with the non-responders (p = 0.152).

The responders showed a significant reduction in SS (p <0.001); in contrast, SS increased in the non-responders (p = 0.003).

SECTION

Non-invasive predictions of baseline HVPG and hemodynamic response to carvedilol therapy

PARAGRAPH

Univariate logistic regression analysis revealed that the following variables were significantly associated with hemodynamic response: follow-up LS (i.e., LS2; odds ratio [OR] 0.203; 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.079–0.479); follow-up SS (i.e., SS2; OR 0.099; 95% CI 0.028–0.289); and difference between SS1 and SS2 (i.e., ΔSS [=SS2 − SS1]; OR 0.059; 95% CI 0.015–0.185).

Multivariate logistic regression analysis identified that ΔSS was the only significant predictor of hemodynamic response (OR 0.039; 95% CI 0.008–0.135; p <0.0001) (Table 3).

PARAGRAPH

A prediction model for hemodynamic response was generated using ΔSS as follows: ModelΔSS = 0.0490–2.8345 × ΔSS; score = (exp[ModelΔSS])/(1 + exp[ModelΔSS]).

Using 0.530 as the threshold value, the AUC was 0.803 (Fig. 4A).

ModelΔSS maintained good discriminant function in the internal validation using 3-fold cross-validation (AUC = 0.801).

The sensitivity, specificity, accuracy, positive- and negative likelihood ratios for predicting hemodynamic response were 0.814, 0.745, 0.783, 3.192, and 0.250, respectively.

In addition, when we tried to explore other cut-off values under various conditions, emphasizing either sensitivity or specificity, a cut-off value of 0.731 was identified with maximized specificity (95% CI 0.542–0.902); the resultant sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy were 0.552, 0.894, and 0.705, respectively.

SECTION

External validation of the ΔSS-based prediction model

PARAGRAPH

In the validation cohort, 72 consecutive patients were evaluated for eligibility.

Of these, 9 patients were excluded for the following reasons: noncompliance to alcohol abstinence (n = 3); discontinuation of medication due to adverse events (n = 2); withdrawal of consent (n = 2); failure in SS measurement due to splenectomy (n = 1); and diagnosis of HCC (n = 1).

Finally, a total of 63 patients completed dose titration of carvedilol and paired HVPG, LS and SS measurements, and were included in the analysis (Fig. 1B).

PARAGRAPH

The baseline characteristics of the validation cohort are shown (Table 1).

The mean age of the enrolled patients was 57 years, and 44 patients were male (69.8%).

Etiologies of cirrhosis were mainly alcohol (36.5%) and viral (hepatitis B, 31.8%; hepatitis C, 12.7%).

The mean MELD score was 9.15.

At baseline, 56 patients (88.9%) had medium- or large-sized esophageal varices, and 66 patients (62.3%) had red wale marks.

Baseline HVPG was 19.2 ± 4.9 mmHg.

ARFI-measured LS and SS were 2.38 ± 0.65 m/s and 3.12 ± 0.56 m/s, respectively.

In comparison with the derivation cohort, there were no significant differences in baseline characteristics, except for maximal carvedilol dose.

Hemodynamic response was observed in 33 patients (52.4%) at a median 12.5 mg of carvedilol.

Baseline demographic and clinical characteristics were not significantly different between hemodynamic responders and non-responders, with the exception of higher HVPG in responders (p = 0.0308).

The changes in hemodynamic parameters between baseline and follow-up after carvedilol therapy are presented (Table 4).

Hemodynamic responders had significantly lower SS at follow-up than non-responders.

However, blood pressure, heart rate, and spleen length were not significantly different between the 2 groups.

The individual patient data on the absolute changes in HVPG, LS and SS stratified by the response group are shown (Fig. 3A-C).

Significantly reduced SS was observed in responders (p <0.001).

The predictive performance of the ModelΔSS in the validation set improved using the same threshold value (AUC = 0.848) (Fig. 4B); the sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy for predicting hemodynamic response with this ΔSS cut-off were 0.848, 0.733 and 0.794, respectively.

In addition, using the other cut-off value 0.731 that maximized specificity in the prediction of hemodynamic response in the derivation set, the sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy in the validation set were 0.545, 0.833, and 0.683, respectively.

SECTION

Comparison of clinical outcomes between hemodynamic responders and non-responders after carvedilol therapy

PARAGRAPH

During follow-up, 10 patients developed alcohol recidivism and 7 patients discontinued NSBBs because of drug-related side effects (e.g., dizziness, impotence, etc.) in the responder group of the derivation cohort; 5 patients developed alcohol recidivism in the non-responder group.

By excluding these 22 patients, portal hypertension-related bleeding was reported in 7 patients out of the responders (16.7%) and 8 out of the non-responders (19.0%).

(p = 0.353) In the validation cohort, however, the occurrence of portal hypertension-related bleeding was significantly more frequent in the non-responder group (7/25; 28.0%) than in the responder group (1/26; 3.8%), respectively (p = 0.021), after excluding 9 patients with alcohol recidivism (4 responders and 5 non-responders) and 3 patients with noncompliance in the responder group.

In addition, the competing risk analysis, which considered death or liver transplantation as competing risks, demonstrated that portal hypertension-related gastrointestinal bleeding developed more frequently in the non-responders than in the responders (p = 0.035), unlike ascites (p = 0.451), spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (p = 0.980) or hepatic encephalopathy (p = 0.077) (Figs. S1, S2).

Among the hemodynamic responders (n = 68) of the entire mixed cohort (i.e., derivation + validation), 36 patients achieved follow-up HVPG of less than 12 mmHg (52.9%), and 32 achieved ≥20% reduction of HVPG from baseline (an absolute value ≥12 mmHg), respectively.

Portal hypertension-related hemorrhage developed in 3 out of 36 patients with follow-up HVPG <12 mmHg (p = 0.044), whereas 5 out of 32 patients with ≥20% HVPG reduction developed hemorrhage (p = 0.149).

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

In this prospective cohort study, we investigated ARFI-based, non-invasive prediction of hemodynamic response to beta-blocker therapy as primary prophylaxis in patients with cirrhosis and high-risk esophageal varices.

A prediction model for hemodynamic response to carvedilol therapy was developed based on changes in SS, showing good predictive performance (AUC >0.8).

Changes in the ARFI-measured SS values from before the initiation of carvedilol therapy to after dose titration may enable the prediction of hemodynamic response to prophylactic beta-blocker therapy, obviating the need for paired measurements of HVPG.

PARAGRAPH

Cirrhotic patients with high-risk esophageal varices may benefit from NSBBs used to prevent the first variceal hemorrhage.

Therefore, recent practice guidelines recommend either NSBBs or EBL as primary prophylaxis for such patients.27,28

Carvedilol, an NSBB with intrinsic anti–α1-adrenergic activity, was recently adopted in guidelines for primary prophylaxis.29,30

Carvedilol was used in the present study due to superior efficacy in reducing portal venous pressure compared with other NSBBs.18,31

However, the significant reduction in mean arterial pressure is the major concern regarding the use of carvedilol, which may be harmful in cirrhotic patients.31

Given that the maximal recommended dose of carvedilol was not clearly defined in the global practice guidelines at the time of the study design, the dose used in the derivation cohort was titrated according to systolic arterial blood pressure and heart rate, as previously described, to a maximum of 25 mg/day (or higher in cases of preexisting arterial hypertension) instead of the recently recommended dose (12.5 mg/day).18

The proportion of hemodynamic responders (n = 59, 55.7%) was similar to the result of a recent Korean report,32 in which the maximal carvedilol dose was 12.5 mg daily; the response rate of the present study was comparable to the results of Reiberger et al.’s study (56% [38/67]), in which carvedilol was used as rescue therapy for non-responders to propranolol.18

In the derivation cohort of the present study, both changes in HVPG and hemodynamic response rates were not significantly different between the high-dose group and the low-dose group, supporting the prioritized use of a lower dose.33,34

PARAGRAPH

To date, there are scarce data on the prediction of hemodynamic response to NSBB prophylaxis in the literature.35

Although HVPG measurement per se provides prognostic information and enables assessment of hemodynamic response to NSBBs based on treatment-related changes in its values, it is invasive, relatively expensive, not always available in all institutions, and even requires expertise.

Likewise, TE-measured SS has been suggested as a novel non-invasive predictor of portal hypertension with promising results.11,12

However, measurement of SS using TE calls for separate ultrasound examination and tends to be dependent on the size of the spleen.

Alternatively, newer ultrasound-based elastographic methods have recently been developed to facilitate SS measurement for evaluating portal hypertension.

Recent prospective studies on ARFI-measured SS have shown promising results regarding its ability to predict the degree of portal hypertension and the severity of varices: one study identified cirrhotic patients with high-risk esophageal varices at the SS cut-off value of 3.30 m/s, and the other study (n = 60) including 29 patients (48.3%) with severe portal hypertension (HVPG ≥12 mmHg) reported a better correlation between HVPG and SS (correlation coefficient, r = 0.876) than LS (r = 0.609, p <0.0001).36,37

In the latter study (n = 60), the SS cut-off for high-risk varices was 3.51 m/s,37 which was higher than the mean SS value of 3.14 m/s at baseline shown in the present study.

The difference in the major etiology of cirrhosis between the studies might explain the discrepancy in the SS values for predicting high-risk varices: hepatitis C (58.3%)37 vs. alcohol (only patients under abstinence were enrolled in the present study; 42.5%).

Indeed, the cut-off SS value for high-risk varices was 3.40 m/s according to our previous study (n = 125), in which hepatitis B was the main etiology (50.4%) of cirrhosis.38

In the present study, only baseline LS in the derivation cohort tended to be slightly higher in non-responders than in responders, without statistical significance.

Significant predictors of baseline HVPG included baseline LS, prothrombin time, and ascites but not SS, suggesting that there is no additional role in discriminating the severity of portal hypertension of SS in these patients who are uniformly accompanied by high-risk varices.

More prominent treatment-related reductions in SS and HVPG were observed in the responders compared to the non-responders.

PARAGRAPH

To our knowledge, prospective studies on the prediction of hemodynamic response using dynamic changes in LS or SS under NSBB treatment have not yet been published.

Although a recent study demonstrated better diagnostic performance of SS for the identification of clinically significant (≥10 mmHg) and severe (≥12 mmHg) portal hypertension and the presence of (high-risk) esophageal varices than that of LS,37 evidence regarding the use of SS in predicting hemodynamic response to NSBBs has been limited.

Our results showed that ΔSS was the only significant predictor of hemodynamic response according to multivariate logistic regression analysis.

In addition, the changes in HVPG paralleled the changes in SS.

Based on these findings, the prediction model (ModelΔSS) was generated using ΔSS as a single parameter and showed good performance for predicting hemodynamic response.

ModelΔSS maintained good discriminant performance in the internal validation using 3-fold cross-validation.

Moreover, its predictive performance improved in the validation cohort where patients were treated with current standard dose of carvedilol (AUC = 0.848).

The results suggest that ΔSS may help to non-invasively identify hemodynamic responders to NSBB therapy, as primary prophylaxis against hemorrhage, in cirrhotic patients with high-risk esophageal varices.

In addition, several recent studies reported a positive correlation between changes in SS and those in portal pressure before and after placement of a transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt, which was not pertinent to LS.39–43

Taken together, the role of SS in the prediction of dynamic changes in HVPG seems promising if the results can be reproduced and properly validated.

PARAGRAPH

When we compared liver-related outcomes between responders and non-responders during follow-up, the occurrence rate of portal hypertension-related hemorrhage was significantly lower in the responders than in the non-responders of the validation group.

The competing risk analysis also showed the same results in the reduction of bleeding risk.

Absence of difference in the bleeding rates between the responders and non-responders in the derivation cohort might occur for several reasons: i) slightly higher proportion of alcoholic patients in the derivation cohort (42.5%) than in the validation cohort (36.5%), ii) underpowered study design to identify significant difference in bleeding rates, particularly the relatively small number of study participants, and iii) positive influence of lower-dose carvedilol on the outcome of responders in the validation cohort compared with that of the responders in the derivation cohort.

A previous study reported that carvedilol treatment was associated with lower bleeding rates than EBL,18 whereas these 2 modalities showed comparable bleeding rates and bleeding-related mortality in another larger scale study.30

In our post hoc analysis, dividing the hemodynamic responders into 2 groups (follow-up HVPG <12 mmHg vs. HVPG reduction ≥20% [yet above 12 mmHg]), those with follow-up HVPG <12 mmHg showed significant risk reduction in bleeding, as was shown in earlier studies.44,45

Recent studies with larger sample sizes than the present study generally reported favorable outcomes in terms of risk reduction in mortality in patients with decompensated cirrhosis, including a systematic review and a network meta-analysis.46–50

Given those liver-related outcomes were not the primary objectives of the present study, our results at least seem helpful in identifying responders who were able to avoid invasive procedures for the prevention of bleeding.

PARAGRAPH

Caution is needed in the interpretation of the present study for the following reasons.

First, the prediction model was developed based on data that were obtained under primary prophylaxis with carvedilol in a Korean population with predominantly alcohol-related cirrhosis followed by hepatitis B-related cirrhosis.

Whether this model would retain its predictive performance under different clinical circumstances (use of other NSBBs, secondary prophylaxis, and different patient characteristics) remains unclear.

Second, we designed this study using the latest available evidence and guidelines at the time of study design.

The use of high-dose carvedilol in the derivation cohort may have caused more profound reductions in portal venous pressure and SS, although the reproducibility of these results in case of lower doses was partially proven in our results.

Third, given that false positivity for HVPG response in non-responders could make them lose an opportunity to discontinue useless NSBB therapy and switch to band ligation, the modified cut-off value for maximizing specificity (0.731) might be better than the original cut-off value.

However, the most optimal cut-off value of ΔSS-based prediction model remains to be determined in further studies.

PARAGRAPH

In conclusion, paired SS measurements using ARFI elastography may be a promising non-invasive tool for predicting hemodynamic response to carvedilol therapy as primary prophylaxis in patients with cirrhosis and high-risk esophageal varices.

Replacement of HVPG measurement with ARFI-measured SS for the prediction of NSBB responses requires further investigation in different clinical settings, including different etiologies, treatment settings, types, and doses of NSBBs.

SECTION

Financial support

PARAGRAPH

This work was supported in part by the Research Supporting Program of the Korean Association for the Study of the Liver (2014) and by a clinical research grant-in-aid from the Seoul Metropolitan Government Seoul National University (SMG-SNU) Boramae Medical Center (03-2014-3).

SECTION

Conflict of interest

PARAGRAPH

The authors declare no conflicts of interest that pertain to this work.

PARAGRAPH

Please refer to the accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.

SECTION

Authors’ contributions

PARAGRAPH

Study conception and design by HYK and WK; data collection by HYK, YHS, D-WA, YJJ, HW and WK; data analysis and interpretation by HYK, WK, DK, MYK and SKB; manuscript writing by HYK, YHS and WK; critical review, revision and approval of the manuscript by HYK, YHS, WK, D-WA, YJJ, HW, DK, MYK and SKB.