10.1016/j.jhep.2018.08.018

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Immune and metabolic shifts during neonatal development reprogram liver identity and function

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

The liver has multiple functions, becoming vitally important from the gestational phase.1

The primordial liver is formed in the initial stages of embryonic development (week 4 in humans and E8.5 in mouse), and it is the destination of several immune cell precursors that arise from the yolk sac.2

Fetal liver harbors different hepatic progenitor cells and a great number of other mesenchyme-derived cells, including immune cells in different stages of maturation.3

In fact, macrophages, hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), endothelial and mesenchymal stem cells compose a complex cellular repertoire during the major part of hepatic embryogenesis.4

The dynamics by which HSCs seed the liver has become a growing field of interest,5 and understanding how tissue macrophages mature within organs and are maintained throughout life may have a significant impact on both basic and clinical investigations.6

PARAGRAPH

Although much is known about hepatic embryonic development and the chronology of hematopoiesis during the gestational phase,7 it is still largely elusive how the liver adapts both the immune system and enzymatic profile to react to a plethora of challenges that a newborn faces in the initial periods after birth.

In fact, abrupt changes in both microbiota and diet are expected during this phase; thus the transition from intra- to extra-uterine life may demand rapid, complex and well-orchestrated steps to ensure neonatal survival and adaptation.8

Advances in this field will help us understand why several infectious diseases that affect the liver lead to higher mortality rates in infants (i.e., Escherichia coli9 and Plasmodium falciparum10) and the putative long-term impacts of inappropriate nutrition on metabolism in children.

For instance, because the liver is located in a circulatory interface between the gastrointestinal tract and the systemic circulation, it is expected that the food quality, the rate of calorie intake and the neonate relationship with the gut microbiota dramatically affect these two mainstreams of hepatic developmental fate.

PARAGRAPH

Herein, we describe how liver morphological reorganization after birth is accompanied by major changes in the populations of hepatic immune cells in mice and humans.

Using a combination of imaging, high-dimensional immunophenotyping and infectious challenges, we show that livers from mouse neonates rapidly evolve into a vital organ in immunosurveillance, acting as a central immune reservoir in newborns.

In addition, we demonstrate that compared to hepatic immunity, several liver metabolic pathways have a slower developmental schedule, reaching an expression profile similar to adults only within the peri-weaning phase.

Finally, we reveal that the normal hepatic metabolic schedule can be regulated by the dietary input, since early-weaned mice display profound alterations in metabolic enzymes involved in management of different macronutrients.

Together, our data provide a novel description of liver neonatal development and establish that an exquisite immune and metabolic program can transform the neonatal liver into a completely different organ in adults.

SECTION

Materials and methods

SECTION

Animals

PARAGRAPH

Female C57BL/6 wild-type, female LysM-EGFP (Lyz2tm1.1Graf, C57BL/6 background), female CX3CR1gfp/wt (B6.129P-Cx3cr1tm1Litt/J, C57BL/6 background), and female Swiss wild-type mice were taken from Centro de Bioterismo in Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais (CTAT Table; CEBIO–UFMG, Brazil).

Controls for genetic modified strains were background, sex and transgenic-matched.

All animals were housed in an enriched-environment (bedding, toys and small houses), in acrylic cages with filtered air system (Alesco; five mice/cage) in a conventional specific pathogen-free facility at the Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais.

Water and food (Labina autoclaved mouse chow, Brazil) were provided ad libitum and a dark/light cycle (12/12 h) was digitally monitored.

All experiments with mice were approved by Animal Ethics Committee from Univesidade Federal de Minas Gerais (register number 034/2017), following international guidelines for animal care.

SECTION

Confocal microscopy and histopathology techniques

PARAGRAPH

Confocal microscopy imaging was performed as described previously.11

For in vivo imaging, before surgery mice received a single dose of anti-F4/80 phycoerythrin (4 mg, clone BM8, eBiosciences, San Diego, CA).

For ex vivo imaging, before surgery mice received a single dose or a mixture of the following antibodies or fluorescent probes: anti-F4/80 phycoerythrin (0.1 μg/g, clone BM8, BioLegend), anti-CD31 BV-421 (0.15 μg/g, clone 390, BD) or anti-CD31 APC (0.3 μg/g, clone 390, BioLegend).

Surgery and delivery of drugs in mouse neonates (via eye venous plexus) were made with minor modifications (Fig. S12).

Human H&E slides were collected from the Necropsy Center at Faculty of Medicine – UFMG.

The procedures with human samples are in accordance with ethical standards from COEP-UFMG (Supplementary CTAT Table, Registration number ETIC 278/08) and informed consent was obtained from all individuals.

Nuclei were stained with DAPI-D1306, Life Technology, USA).

Liver samples were collected for H&E analysis and for frozen sections.

Immunohistochemistry was performed as described.11

For staining of immune cells, we combined rat anti-mouse anti-GR1, F4/80, CD19, CD172a, CD117 and CD3 in a cocktail.

Alexa Fluor 633 secondary antibody (anti-mouse) stained all these antibodies.

Mouse anti-albumin was used to visualize hepatocytes.

All confocal images were acquired using an inverted Nikon Eclipse Ti coupled to an A1 scanning head with no modifications.

Blood flow quantification after latex bead injection (1.5 × 105 beads/20 g of weight; i.v.) was done using resonant scanner (6 fps; analysis of first 2 s of bead arrival in the field of view).

Digital quantification was made by Volocity (6.3) (Perkin Elmer, Waltham, MA).

SECTION

Liver nonparenchymal cells

PARAGRAPH

Liver nonparenchymal cells (LNPCs) from mice 0, 7, 21 days after birth and adults (8 weeks) were isolated as reported previously.11

Livers were digested in a collagenase solution and cells were differentially separated by centrifugation.

For time-of flight mass cytometry (CyTOF) experiments, 1 × 106 cells were stained with isotope-conjugated antibodies as described (Supplementary CTAT Table).11

Events were gated for CD45+ cells, and platelets, red blood cells, and hepatic stellate cells were excluded from analysis.

Samples were acquired with a Helios Mass Cytometer (Fluidigm, South San Francisco, CA) and data were plotted using viSNE analysis as described previously.11

In a separated set of experiments, LNPCs were incubated with E. coligpf (MOI 50:1 E. coli/lineage+ cells, 1 h of incubation; 37 °C).

F4/80+ GFP+ events were quantified using Accuri C6 Flow cytometer.

SECTION

Isolation of bone marrow and spleen cells

PARAGRAPH

Bone marrows and spleens from mice 0, 7, 21 days after birth and adults (8 weeks) were isolated as reported previously.11

A minimum of 10,000 cells per sample were acquired in a Cytoflex B-R-V (Beckman Coulter, USA) and analyzed by Kaluza 1.5a software.

SECTION

Systemic Escherichia coli injection

PARAGRAPH

Escherichia coli GFP (ATCC 25922GFP) were cultivated in Luria broth medium (MP Biomedicals, Santa Ana, CA).

In flow cytometry experiments, mice received 5x106 GFP-E.

coli per 20 g (body weight) intravenously.

Five minutes after bacteria injection, 10 μl of blood were immediately diluted in phosphate-buffered saline (1:40) and read in Accuri C6 cytometer.

The percentage of all GFP-positive events acquired was used to estimate the number of free E. coli in the systemic circulation.

To image E. coli capture in vivo, mice received 5 × 107 GFP-E.

coli intravenously, and were imaged under confocal microscopy for 10 min.

The amount of bacteria injected was adjusted according to the weight of the mouse (5 × 107 E. coli/20 g of mouse weight).

SECTION

Bacterial load within liver and blood

PARAGRAPH

For colony-forming unit (CFU) estimation, mice intravenously received 5 × 105 GFP-E.

coli per 20 g (body weight).

Liver and blood were removed 24 h after injection, and aliquots of each organ were cultivated in Petri dishes at 37 °C.

SECTION

Liver aminotransferase activity

PARAGRAPH

Liver alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate transaminase (AST) activity were accessed using a kinetic test (Bioclin).

Liver samples were collected from mice from day 0 after birth through to eight weeks, and homogenized with a mechanical grinder to completely disrupt the liver parenchymal cells.

Samples were processed according to manufacturer’s protocol.

SECTION

Liver function test

PARAGRAPH

Indocyanine cardiogreen (ICG; Sigma-Aldrich) was measured as previously described.11

Briefly, mice received 20 mg/kg i.v. of ICG dye, and after 10 min blood was collected.

Diluted plasma was plated in 96-wells polystyrene plate (Nunc, Denmark) and the absorbance measured at 800 nm using a microplate reader (Versa Max).

SECTION

Gene expression by real-time PCR

PARAGRAPH

Total RNA samples were isolated from total liver using the ReliaPrep™ RNA TissueMiniprep System® (Promega), and the RNA obtained was quantified on NanoDrop®.

Reverse transcription of RNA was performed using iScript cDNA Synthesis Kit (BioRad).

The resulting cDNAs were amplified by qPCR reaction with iTaq Universal SYBR Green Supermix (BioRad) in a Rotor-Gene Q (Qiagen).

Fold increase for each age was calculated using ΔΔCt method, with Gapdh as the endogenous gene for normalization.

Primers used can be found in Supplementary CTAT Table.

SECTION

Early weaning protocol

PARAGRAPH

Mice aged 14 days (one week before the normal period of weaning) were separated from mothers, and a custom-made wet diet (same nutritional contents used for adults) was offered on cage floor.

SECTION

Statistical analyses

PARAGRAPH

Experimental data were analyzed using one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc test) and unpaired Student t test provided by Prism 6.0 software (GraphPad).

All data are given as the mean ± SEM.

Differences were considered to be significant at p <0.05.

Experiments were repeated at least twice and all data were included in analysis.

In mice experiments, at least five mice were included in each replicate.

PARAGRAPH

For further details regarding the materials used, please refer to the CTAT table.

SECTION

Results

SECTION

Morphological organization of neonatal livers resembles an immune organ in mouse and humans

PARAGRAPH

To map liver microenvironment during stages of development, we used a combination of immunofluorescence, whole mount tissue and histology procedures in all different liver zones (capsule, central and portal veins).

We found that livers from mice on day 0 displayed the highest cell density amongst all the timepoints investigated.

Nucleus morphology was largely variable and numerous islets composed of different immune cells were observed (Fig. 1A).

Moreover, we found a minor population of hepatocytes harboring globoid nuclei, which also stained weakly for albumin within the cytoplasm (Fig. 1A and Fig. S1 and S2).

Thus, liver microscopic organization in newborns on day 0 did not resemble that of adult mice, since liver cells were not organized in hepatocyte cords, but rather constituted a homogeneous aggregate without clear compartmentalization.

Consistent with this, hepatic microvessels were shorter and displayed a honeycomb pattern of distribution (Fig. 1B).

This morphologic arrangement generated abundant rooms for small and round cellular islets, which we have termed “avascular cords” (presumably hepatocyte cords; Fig. 1C).

To further examine these cellular characteristics in detail, we prepared samples for histological analysis and found that neonate livers had several nests of immune cells (Fig. 1D and Fig. S1, black arrows) that were surrounded by hepatocyte-like cells (Fig. 1D – red arrows; Fig. S1).

These findings indicate that neonatal livers do not primarily harbor parenchymal cells, but rather retain large populations of leukocytes.

From four days to eight weeks after birth, liver morphology organized as longer hepatocyte cords and sinusoids (Fig. 1A, D and Fig. S1).

However, like day 0, we still observed a significant retention of immune cell aggregates within the liver parenchyma (Fig. 1A, insert).

Three to four weeks after birth, livers presented a cellular organization that resembled adults (eight weeks), and hepatocytes were clearly identified in histopathology (Fig. 1D; red arrows).

Moreover, liver microvasculature evolved to longer sinusoids that surrounded larger and elliptical avascular cords, which were clearly occupied by hepatocytes at these timepoints (Fig. 1B, D and Fig. S1).

Concomitantly, we observed a major reduction in the frequency of immune cells within the liver parenchyma and, when found, these cells were almost exclusively located in the intravascular compartment (Fig. 1D, blue arrows).

PARAGRAPH

To investigate whether these findings in mice were observed in humans, we collected liver biopsies from human neonates and adults.

All samples included in this study were collected from patients that were not diagnosed with liver diseases.

Consistent with our findings in mice, livers from human neonates displayed a large population of immune cells within the hepatic parenchyma, and the typical adult liver histological organization was not observed.

In fact, human livers had higher cell density in newborns than in adults (Fig. 1E), and hepatocyte cords were not clearly identified.

Notably, numerous islets of immune cells were also frequently observed in these patients (Fig. 1E, black arrows).

Taken together, our data revealed that newborns have a very different hepatic cellular composition and organization, harboring a large number of cells with immunologic phenotype and distinct microvascular arrangements.

SECTION

Neonatal hepatic immune populations are very different to those in adults

PARAGRAPH

Our imaging approaches strongly suggested the presence of large populations of immune cells within the neonatal hepatic environment.

However, a complete description of immune cell populations during neonatal development is still absent in the literature.

To precisely characterize these cells, we performed a high-dimensional immunophenotyping using time-of-flight mass cytometry (CyTOF; Fig. 2A, Fig. S3-7).

Live CD45+ events (all subtypes of immune cells) were initially gated, and using an unbiased viSNE algorithm (Fig. 2B),11 we clustered cells based on the expression of specific markers that allowed for their classification and quantification.

We found that livers from mice on day 0 had the most diverse population of immune cells compared to other ages (Fig. S3).

We identified 22 different clusters of immune cells at this timepoint, where the most frequent cell types were granulocytes (∼40%; Ly6G+ CD172+ CD11b+ and/or Siglec F+; Fig. 2C), immature B cells (∼12%; CD45low CD19+; Fig. 2D) and monocytes (∼10%; Ly6C+ CD11b+ CD172+; Fig. 2F).

Of note, CD45high/+ CD19+ cells were considered as mature B cells (Fig. 1E and Fig. S4).

Macrophages (F4/80+, Fig. 2G) and DCs (CD11c+ F4/80−; Fig. 2H) had similar frequency in newborns on day 0 (∼1–2%).

We also found clusters that were not clearly distinguished between monocytes and macrophages (Ly6Chi F4/80hi; Fig. 2I), thus grouped as undefined monocytes/macrophages.

In addition, a large population of lineage (Lin)− CD45low CD117+ cells (∼12%) was observed on day 0, which can circumscribe hematopoietic cells (Fig. 2J).

Surprisingly, no classic T cells (CD3+ cells; Fig. 2K) or natural killer T (NKT) cells (CD3+ NK1.1+; Fig. 2L) were observed within the liver on day 0, and only a minor population of Ly6C+ T cells (<2%; Fig. 2B and K) and NK cells (<2%; CD3− NK 1.1+; Fig. 2M) were identified.

Thus, at least 70% of all hepatic immune cells on day 0 are from the myeloid lineage, with a significant maintenance of populations of liver hematopoietic cells even after birth.

PARAGRAPH

At one week of age, granulocytes were still the most abundant population found within the liver (∼50%; Fig. 2C and Fig. S5), and the frequency of T cells, NKT and NK cells increased (∼4–5% each, Fig. 2K-M).

The frequency of immune cell precursors decreased (∼12 to 9%; Fig. 2J) and immature B cells were no longer found throughout the experiments (Fig. 2D).

The frequency of undefined monocytes/macrophages had a major increase (2 to 8%; Fig. 2I) and these cells were not detected at later timepoints evaluated in this study.

In fact, the frequency of precursors declined whereas the frequency of macrophages and DCs increased by twofold and threefold, respectively (Fig. 2G and H).

At three weeks of age, a profound modification in hepatic immune cell populations was observed (Fig. S 6).

The number of granulocytes (∼17%; Fig. 2C) and monocytes (∼7%; Fig. 2F) dropped significantly, reaching similar frequencies to those found in adults.

In sharp contrast, the highest frequency of lymphoid cells was detected at this timepoint.

Together, B cells (∼20%), T cells (∼17%), NKT cells (∼10%) and NK cells (∼10%) composed the main hepatic population of immune cells three weeks after birth (∼60% of all CD45+ cells; Fig. 2E, K-M) – a full inversion compared to neonates on day 0.

Furthermore, the macrophage population increased at the third week after birth (∼5 to 10%; Fig. 2G), and became stable in ∼13% of adults, whereas liver DCs underwent a minor reduction (Fig. 2H).

In summary, hepatic immune cell populations in adults can be divided into two large groups: 2/3 composed of lymphocytes and 1/3 composed of macrophages, DCs, monocytes and granulocytes.

Interestingly, amongst all immune cell subsets, B cells comprised the largest population of liver leukocytes in adults.

Taking together, cells from myeloid and B cell lineage primarily inhabit livers in the initial postnatal period, and a chronological succession throughout the neonatal development completely shifts the immunologic profile of the liver (Fig. 2N).

SECTION

Hepatic immune cells are widely distributed within neonatal liver, and become compartmentalized in specific liver zones during development

PARAGRAPH

To confirm our data from high-dimensional immunophenotyping, we selected mouse strains that express GFP under control of different promoters related to immune cells, and imaged their distribution throughout all different zones across the liver sections (Fig. 3A).

Consistent with our CyTOF findings, an enormous population of LysMgfp cells (Ly6C+ macrophages and Ly6G+ granulocytes) was found in mouse livers from day 0 up to one week of age, and spherical LysM+ cells were uniformly distributed throughout the field of view.

At three weeks of age, we observed a significant alteration in LysM+ population since only a few round LysM+ cells (mainly neutrophils and monocytes) were detected, the vast majority were composed of elongated, star-shaped LysM cells (Fig. 3B).

Considering their co-expression of F4/80 in adults11 (a pan-macrophage antigen), LysM resident cells at this timepoint were defined as a sessile population of Kupffer cells (KCs).

PARAGRAPH

Our CyTOF analysis revealed not only the presence of mature immune cells in neonatal livers, but also the maintenance of populations of hematopoietic precursors.

The chemokine receptor CX3CR1 is highly expressed on committed macrophage/dendritic cell precursors during immune system maturation and it is maintained throughout life in liver monocytes, immature macrophages and DCs.11

This offers both a useful tool for in situ imaging and a strong link with our CyTOF data.

To better investigate the liver cell phenotype, we labeled F4/80+ cells in vivo in Cx3cr1gfp/wt mice at different ages after birth.

At a lower magnification of a transversal liver segment that included different zones of liver lobes (Fig. 3C and D and Fig. S8-10), we visualized a massive presence of both CX3CR1 and F4/80 positive cells throughout all liver compartments.

These cells fit into several clusters in our CyTOF analysis, including hematopoietic precursors, monocytes and macrophage/DC clusters.

We also found that populations of F4/80+ cells shared room with CX3CR1+ cells in the internal sites of newborn livers (Fig. 3D-F), whereas CX3CR1+ dendritic-shaped cells exclusively surrounded the liver capsule (Fig. 3C, Fig. S8-10 and Supplementary Movie 1).

At a higher magnification, populations that expressed only CX3CR1 or F4/80 (Fig. 3E and F) were also detected; however, we observed an abundant population of double positive cells (CX3CR1+ F4/80+; Fig. 3F, white arrows) in livers from mice up to one week after birth.

From three weeks of age up to adulthood, the number of CX3CR1+ cells within the liver dropped dramatically (Fig. 3G and J), and these cells occupied areas adjacent to larger vessels and surrounding the liver capsule (Fig. S8–10 and Supplementary Movies 2–5).

As seen in our CyTOF plots, the frequency of F4/80+ cells only changed slightly over time (Fig. 3H and J and Fig. S6 and 7) and they organized as intravascular macrophages, occupying specific areas between two post-sinusoidal venules (Fig. S8-10), which were previously defined as the “sinusoidal zone”.11

Like CX3CR1+ cells, the frequency of double positive cells also underwent a significant decrease over the developmental period (Fig. 3I and J), and several cells that expressed only CX3CR1 or F4/80 were subsequently detected in adults (Fig. 3F, Fig. S8–10 and Supplementary Movie 6).

Thus, taking together the in situ liver imaging with our CyTOF analyzes, we described in detail the existence of different immune cell phenotypes within the liver, and their differential location during liver development after birth.

SECTION

Neonatal bone marrow and spleen aplasia is concomitant with accumulation of hematopoietic cells in the liver

PARAGRAPH

It is currently accepted that the bone marrow becomes the major site of hematopoiesis at the end of the gestational phase.12

However, we hypothesized that such abundance of myeloid and hematopoietic cells in neonatal livers may be due to a diminished cell frequency in other hematopoietic sites in the initial phases after birth.

We then investigated the frequency of HSCs in the bone marrow and spleen at the different developmental ages, starting on day 0 (Fig. 4A).

Lin− cells comprise different HSCs and Lin− CD135+ are committed HSCs.13

In fact, we found a dramatic absence of several hematopoietic precursors in bone marrow and spleen from neonatal mice up to one week after birth (Lin− and Lin− CD135+ cells; Fig. 4B-H), and normal cell populations were only found at one week of age (Fig. 4B-H).

In the bone marrow, myeloid precursors were the most frequent Lin− cells throughout the ages (Fig. 4F).

Thus, neonatal livers may supply myeloid cell precursors during a temporary aplasia in other lymphoid organs.

SECTION

Liver phagocytes rapidly become functional to capture and kill blood-borne bacteria

PARAGRAPH

The highest frequency of phagocytes and innate immune cells was found in neonate livers (0–1 week of age), suggesting that the liver harbors a cellular repertoire that may support an effective site for bacterial clearance even in the first moments after birth.

To test this hypothesis, we challenged newborn mice during the different phases of development with an intravenous injection of E. coli, the most common pathogen that causes severe sepsis in the neonatal period.14

We found that 0-day old newborns had the highest number of free E. coli in the systemic circulation (Fig. 5A-B), which accounted for significantly higher counts of CFUs in the liver tissue 24 h after infection (Fig. 5C and D).

Moreover, we found a 60% mortality rate in neonates on day 0 after a single bacterial challenge (Fig. 5E).

However, as early as four days after birth, challenged neonates were more effective in clearing bacteria from the bloodstream compared to 0-day old neonates (Fig. 5B), though elevated counts of circulating bacteria in the blood and hepatic CFUs were still detected (Fig. 5C).

Nevertheless, four days after birth all mice had survived the bacterial challenges (Fig. 5E).

In the subsequent ages (up to adulthood), E. coli inoculum (using a correspondent weight-corrected dose) was effectively cleared from the circulation, and despite the residual number of E. coli CFUs within the liver, no further deaths were observed.

PARAGRAPH

To better understand the immunoevasive mechanisms of E. coli infection in neonates, we used a novel approach to image newborn immune responses to bacteria using confocal intravital microscopy11 (Fig. 5F).

Using intravital tracking of latex beads inside hepatic microvasculature, we initially established that there were no significant differences in blood flow within the experimental ages (Fig. S 11A).

After intravenous injection in adults, numerous E. coli reached the liver within 5–10 s, being almost instantaneously arrested by KCs within the liver sinusoids (Fig. 5G and Supplementary Movie 7).

Once arrested, the majority of E. coli remained trapped on the KC membrane until the end of the experimental time (10 min; Fig. 5G).

In sharp contrast, most of E. coli that reached the newborn liver microcirculation were trafficked freely within the sinusoids, with weakened or delayed arrest by KCs (Fig. 5G and Supplementary Movie 7).

Digital tracking of E. coli movement revealed that while KCs from adults instantaneously imprisoned and immobilized circulating bacteria, E. coli traveled for longer distances within hepatic microvessels in neonates, which can predispose their transit across the liver and their spreading to remote organs (Fig. 5H).

Interestingly, when we challenged isolated liver macrophages from different ages (F4/80+ cells) in vitro using direct incubation with E. coli, these phagocytes were equally effective in engulfing bacteria (Fig. S11B-D).

Thus, neonatal mice are more susceptible to infections only in the first days after birth, and this may be a result of inefficient bacterial arresting in the bloodstream by neonatal liver macrophages.

PARAGRAPH

To further investigate the mechanisms underlying this inefficiency of bacterial arresting in newborns, we measured the hepatic expression of genes related to bacterial recognition, phagocytosis and killing at different ages.

To avoid unwanted changes in gene expression due to cell sorting procedures, we collected whole liver samples for analysis.

Gathering together high-dimensional data in a heatmap-clustered representation, we found that gene expression was largely variable within the functional categories and throughout the ages.

Despite the fluctuations over the developmental period, several relevant genes in the context of phagocytosis and macrophage function, including Crig, Cd163, Inos and Nr1h3, were significantly less expressed in neonates up to four days old, when compared to adults (Fig. 5I), coinciding with the susceptibility window that we observed in our in vivo infection study.

We then explored the dynamics of the expression of these genes during a bacterial challenge and found that livers from E. coli-infected newborns (day 0) also expressed lower levels of phagocytosis-related genes compared to infected adult livers.

Similarly, adult gene expression levels were only found in neonatal mice that were challenged four days after birth, and despite several fluctuations during the developmental period, the lowest gene expression levels were detected on day 0.

Of note, other receptors belonging to pathogen-sensing pathways, including Tlr2, Tlr4 and Itgam were more highly expressed in neonates following bacterial challenge compared to adults, dropping to baseline levels after two weeks of age (Fig. 5J), which may be the result of the clearly different immune cell population in these mice.

Thus, it appears that even if relevant molecules involved in the context of immune response to pathogens are already expressed in neonates, the delayed expression of scavenger receptors and impaired bacterial arrest may confer early susceptibility to E. coli infection and spreading.

SECTION

Full hepatic metabolic capacity is acquired during weaning period

PARAGRAPH

Once we had characterized the immune populations and the chronology of immune response maturation in newborns, we next investigated a key step in the final liver development: the hepatic metabolism.

We developed a panel containing genes belonging to pathways for metabolism of carbohydrates, lipids, xenobiotics and bile acids.

Bioinformatics’ analysis allocated genes based on their ontogeny suggested by the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG).

We used Gapdh as the normalizing gene because its expression was the least variable amongst all ages compared to other targets (Actb, Rpl4 and Sdha).

To achieve results that reflect the whole organ, we collected samples from all different liver lobes and regions, avoiding cell isolation procedures.

We found that almost all analyzed genes associated with metabolic pathways were expressed at lower levels on days 0 and 4 after birth than in adults (Fig. 6A).

For instance, expression of genes involved in bile synthesis, metabolism of xenobiotics, lipid metabolism and elongation, including Elovl3 (Fatty Acid Elongase 3), Cyp8b1 (Cytochrome P450 family 8 subfamily B member 1) and Fasn (Fatty acid synthase) was dramatically lower compared to controls up to one to two weeks after birth.

This suggests that the metabolic activity of fatty acids, bile secretion and detoxification – key functions played by the liver – are reduced at this timepoint compared to adults.

Several genes related to carbohydrate metabolism were also less expressed during the first days after birth, but had a faster pattern of elevation to adult levels.

Thus, these findings reveal a relative metabolic latency in neonate livers, which was more evident for lipid metabolism pathways.

PARAGRAPH

Elevation of serum levels of liver aminotransferases (ALT and AST) is a hallmark of liver necrosis and is a gold-standard diagnostic tool for acute liver diseases.

When we attempted to establish serum reference values of ALT and AST in neonatal mice, we found undetectable AST and ALT levels even after lethal doses of acetaminophen (not shown).

Surprisingly, even healthy newborns had no detectable ALT or AST activity in liver macerates (Fig. 6B and C), and real-time PCR analysis for specific Alt and Ast gene sequences confirmed that levels of hepatic Alt and Ast mRNAs were minimally expressed for up to two weeks after birth (Fig. 6D and E).

Normal levels of aminotransferase were reached only three weeks after birth (Fig. 6B-E).

This begets that – at least for neonates – assessment of liver injury grade by quantifying serum levels of aminotransferases should be cautiously evaluated.

Of note, the lack of ALT synthesis in newborns was confirmed using a non-isogenic mouse strain (Swiss mice) that was bred outside our facility, under different food and environmental conditions (Fig. 6F).

To investigate whether such a reduction in enzyme expression affected liver functions in newborns, we directly measured liver clearance ability using indocyanine green depuration rate.11

We found that, until reaching two weeks of age, neonatal livers had diminished depurative ability compared to adults (Fig. 6G).

Consistent with this, albumin synthesis – another gold-standard clinical marker of liver function – was also reduced for up to four days after birth (Fig. 6H).

Of note, the expression dynamics of alpha-fetoprotein (Afp) were used as a positive control in our samples (Fig. 6I).

Taken together the functional tests, aminotransferase activity, and expression chronology of several metabolic genes demonstrated that the full metabolic capacity of the liver is reached in a period between three and four weeks after birth.

Interestingly, this overlaps with the weaning period, suggesting that the dietary input may have a dramatic impact on the regulation of mouse metabolic profile and development.

SECTION

Early weaning disturbs the schedule of liver metabolic development

PARAGRAPH

To investigate the mechanisms by which the diet orchestrates the development of the liver metabolic profile, we first established the exact timepoint in which newborns naturally changed their diet from milk to chow.

We detected traces of chow in mouse stomachs as soon as 12 days after birth (not shown).

Therefore, we decided to prematurely wean mice at two weeks of age (one week before the normal period; Fig. 7A), and offered a custom-made diet ad libitum on the cage floor (same nutritional contents used for adults).

To assure that mice were properly fed in the absence of breastfeeding, we monitored food intake every 2 h during the entire experimental period.

We found that early weaning caused profound changes in the expression of several liver metabolic enzymes, and longer periods of weaning (four days compared to two days) caused even higher alterations in the expression of metabolic genes, particularly those involved in lipid metabolism (Fig. 7B-E).

Several mRNAs from enzymes belonging to lipid synthesis and elongation pathways were increased, including fatty acid synthase (Fasn), fatty acid elongase 3 (Elovl3) and stearoyl-CoA desaturase (Scd1; Fig. 7B), indicating that liver metabolic development is directly regulated by dietary contents.

Early weaning also caused a slight increase in gene expression levels and activity of liver aminotransferases (Alt and Ast; Fig. 7D), but enzymes belonging to carbohydrate metabolism were less affected (Fig. 7C).

For example, hexokinase 1 and phosphofructokinase mRNAs were upregulated whereas fructose-1,6-bisphosphase and glycogen phosphorylase mRNAs were downregulated (Fig. 7C).

Thus, dietary change primarily affects lipid metabolism enzymes (Fig. 7B), demonstrating that while liver immune development occurs in newborns during the lactation phase, metabolic maturation may be regulated by nutritional contents in the food that primarily occurs after the weaning period.

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

Using a complex and novel combination of experimental approaches, we showed that livers from newborns are sharply different from adult livers.

Such disparities could be attributed to a unique morphological and vascular architecture in both mice and humans that harbors a mixed population of immune cells and hepatocytes in the first periods of life.

Likewise, when compared to adult liver, neonatal mouse liver exhibited a myeloid-enriched immune system.

This was followed by a transient phagocytic immaturity with enhanced susceptibility to bacterial infections in the first days after birth.

For the first time, we imaged the newborn hepatic microenvironment in vivo, and revealed that KCs in neonatal mice are unable to arrest bacteria under flow, along with a lower expression of several scavenger receptors.

This provides a putative explanation of why infants are more susceptible to sepsis, particularly due to E. coli infection.

In parallel with the immune development, we also showed that the genetic metabolic profiles throughout neonatal development may be directly regulated and affected by the dietary program.

Taking together both liver immunity and metabolism, we propose that our findings (i) profoundly impact our understanding on immune responses and hepatic hematopoiesis in newborns; (ii) may guide the clinical interpretation of laboratorial tests that are based on the levels and expression of liver-related enzymes in newborns; (iii) highlight the relevance of neonatal feeding agenda to the expression of liver metabolic pathways; and more importantly, (iv) pave the way for deeper investigations on which dietary components and signaling pathways are relevant in the context of liver immune and metabolic maturation in newborns.

PARAGRAPH

Despite the large description of cell changes in neonatal livers, an extensive characterization of immune cell profile within postnatal hepatic development was still absent in the literature.

It is well accepted that the liver is the main hematopoietic site in the embryo and it has been suggested that these functions terminate in later phases of development, which are rapidly replaced by the bone marrow after birth.15,16

Contrastingly, it has also been proposed that the neonatal liver may retain extramedullary hematopoiesis,17 which also begets that hepatic immune system may need supplementary maturation in the post-uterine phase.

Our data corroborated this hypothesis showing the presence of immune cells with characteristics of hematopoietic precursors and immature leukocytes in neonates up to two weeks after birth (Lin−/low CD117+).18

Concomitantly, we visualized in situ a large hepatic cell population that also presented several features of immature phagocytes, including non-conventional round cells with simultaneous expression of CX3CR1 and F4/80.11

Of note, we have previously shown that immature precursors that repopulate the liver after full phagocyte ablation were also CX3CR1 and F4/80 double positive cells, with reduced phagocytic capacity.11

This provides a direct link between our CyTOF and imaging analysis, since populations of CX3CR1+ F4/80+ cells visualized in neonatal samples may belong to the clusters of immature or undefined macrophages observed in our CyTOF analysis.

These cells also exhibited lower bacterial arresting and impaired killing ability as seen in intravital imaging from newborns.

Although the liver may be considered a lymphoid organ in adults, we revealed that T cells and NKT cells are virtually non-existent in livers from 0-day old newborn mice, and only populations of B cells – possibility immature due to the low CD45 expression – were found.

A question that remains to be answered is why neonatal livers only transiently store all these immune cells.

A possible explanation is that other immune organs (i.e. bone marrow and spleen) from neonates are aplastic during the first week of life17 and that the neonatal immune system may use alternative organs to finalize maturation.

In fact, liver environment receiving a major antigen input from the gastrointestinal circulation may be a strategic site to support newborn immune maturation while this function is progressively replaced by the bone marrow and the spleen.

PARAGRAPH

In line with the hypothesis that neonatal livers display a delayed schedule of metabolic maturation compared to immune development,19 we found that a substantial number of enzymes (∼70% of all enrolled in this study) were less expressed in neonates, particularly on days 0 and 4 after birth.

Particularly, several enzymes related to lipid synthesis/elongation displayed a lower and delayed expression pattern throughout the initial phases of the mouse developmental period.

Such chronology may be explained by the higher lipid content delivered in mouse milk (∼29%) compared to carbohydrates (∼2%),20 which imprints a differential drive in these metabolic pathways.

In fact, we found that most of these enzymes displayed a clear shift in the expression pattern in periods closer to weaning (third to fourth week of life) when the dietary composition offered in chow was very different from milk (∼3% of fat and ∼65% of carbohydrates).21

Considering that nutritional challenges may have a major impact on neonatal development, we also investigated how expression dynamics of metabolic pathways during the developmental period are impacted by dietary changes.

We found that prematurely weaned mice rapidly reacted and displayed a significant increase in the hepatic expression of several enzymes belonging to fatty acid metabolism.

Thus, despite the tightly regulated program that prepares the liver for the weaning phase, abrupt changes in diet can rapidly reprogram the hepatic enzymatic repertoire.

Taken together, we showed that liver immune development rapidly occurs in the first weeks of postnatal life whereas hepatic metabolic maturation occurs at later timepoints and can be regulated by the dietary program.

PARAGRAPH

In conclusion, our data provide a novel landscape of hepatic immune and metabolic development.

The liver in neonates can be considered as a completely different organ from that in adults, perhaps also exerting very distinct functions.

While adult liver acts as a vital metabolic and immune surveillance site, neonatal livers may primarily function as a reservoir of cells at different stages of development and pluripotency.

Considering the hepatic retention of hematopoietic precursors with the concomitant relative bone marrow aplasia in neonates, we propose that the liver may be a central organ for immune cell maturation after birth.

We propose that proper neonatal nutrition is important for minimal hepatic metabolic activities, avoiding impairment in immunologic development.

Therefore, a relative hepatic plasticity in enzymatic pathways may grant the neonatal liver a greater chance of adapting to environmental and nutritional challenges.

Our findings shed a new light on how diseases and dietary strategies in neonates may have a long-term impact on the immune and metabolic systems in adults.

SECTION

Financial support

PARAGRAPH

This work was supported byFAPEMIG, CAPES and CNPq (Brazil).

SECTION

Conflict of interest

PARAGRAPH

The authors declare no conflicts of interest that pertain to this work.

PARAGRAPH

Please refer to the accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.

SECTION

Authors’ contributions

PARAGRAPH

B.N.N., H.M.C.O., C.D.M.M. and A.C.C.S. performed confocal microscopy experiments and imaging analysis.

G.H.C.S. and B.N.N. performed immunohistochemistry experiments and analyzed data.

G.A.B.M. performed methacrylate inclusion slides experiment and analyzed data.

P.V.T.V. and C.X.L. provided liver biopsies from human fetuses, neonates and adults and analyzed data.

R.M.R. and T.G.M. performed CyTOF experiments and analyzed data.

R.F.N., R.C.G., A.B.D., M.M.A. and V.A.S.L. performed bone marrow and spleen flow cytometry experiment and analyzed data.

E.C. and M.F.M.M. performed bacterial infections experiments and analyzed data.

B.N.N., K.M., M.E.L., A.M.A. and M.S.M. performed qPCR experiments and analysis.

G.R.F. performed bioinformatics analysis of gene expression.

D.M.A., M.A.F.L and M.M.A. performed hepatic clearance experiment and analyzed data.

G.B.M. and B.A.D. designed the study.

G.B.M. and R.M.R. wrote the paper.