10.1016/j.jhep.2019.08.024

ABSTRACT

TITLE

TNF-α/IFN-γ profile of HBV-specific CD4 T cells is associated with liver damage and viral clearance in chronic HBV infection

PARAGRAPH

The role of hepatitis B virus (HBV)-specific CD4 T cells in patients with chronic HBV infection is not clear.

Thus, we aimed to elucidate this in patients with chronic infection, and those with hepatitis B flares.

PARAGRAPH

Through intracellular IFN-γ and TNF-α staining, HBV-specific CD4 T cells were analyzed in 68 patients with chronic HBV infection and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) <2x the upper limit of normal (ULN), and 28 patients with a hepatitis B flare.

HBV-specific HLA-DRB1*0803/HLA-DRB1*1202-restricted CD4 T cell epitopes were identified.

PARAGRAPH

TNF-α producing cells were the dominant population in patients’ HBV-specific CD4 T cells.

In patients with ALT <2xULN, both the frequency and the dominance of HBV-specific IFN-γ producing CD4 T cells increased sequentially in patients with elevated levels of viral clearance: HBV e antigen (HBeAg) positive, HBeAg negative, and HBV surface antigen (HBsAg) negative.

In patients with a hepatitis B flare, the frequency of HBV core-specific TNF-α producing CD4 T cells was positively correlated with patients’ ALT and total bilirubin levels, and the frequency of those cells changed in parallel with the severity of liver damage.

Patients with HBeAg/HBsAg loss after flare showed higher frequency and dominance of HBV-specific IFN-γ producing CD4 T cells, compared to patients without HBeAg/HBsAg loss.

Both the frequency and the dominance of HBV S-specific IFN-γ producing CD4 T cells were positively correlated with the decrease of HBsAg during flare.

A differentiation process from TNF-α producing cells to IFN-γ producing cells in HBV-specific CD4 T cells was observed during flare.

Eight and 9 HBV-derived peptides/pairs were identified as HLA-DRB1*0803 restricted epitopes and HLA-DRB1*1202 restricted epitopes, respectively.

PARAGRAPH

HBV-specific TNF-α producing CD4 T cells are associated with liver damage, while HBV-specific IFN-γ producing CD4 T cells are associated with viral clearance in patients with chronic HBV infection.

