10.1016/j.jhep.2019.02.024

ABSTRACT

TITLE

Loss of fibrocystin promotes interleukin-8-dependent proliferation and CTGF production of biliary epithelium

PARAGRAPH

Congenital hepatic fibrosis (CHF) is a genetic liver disease resulting in abnormal proliferation of cholangiocytes and progressive hepatic fibrosis.

CHF is caused by mutations in the PKHD1 gene and the subsequent dysfunction of the protein it encodes, fibrocystin.

However, the underlying molecular mechanism of CHF, which is quite different from liver cirrhosis, remains unclear.

This study investigated the molecular mechanism of CHF pathophysiology using a genetically engineered human induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cell model to aid the discovery of novel therapeutic agents for CHF.

PARAGRAPH

PKHD1-knockout (PKHD1-KO) and heterozygously mutated PKHD1 iPS clones were established by RNA-guided genome editing using the CRISPR/Cas9 system.

The iPS clones were differentiated into cholangiocyte-like cells in cysts (cholangiocytic cysts [CCs]) in a 3D-culture system.

PARAGRAPH

The CCs were composed of a monolayer of cholangiocyte-like cells.

The proliferation of PKHD1-KO CCs was significantly increased by interleukin-8 (IL-8) secreted in an autocrine manner.

IL-8 production was significantly elevated in PKHD1-KO CCs due to mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway activation caused by fibrocystin deficiency.

The production of connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) was also increased in PKHD1-KO CCs in an IL-8-dependent manner.

Furthermore, validation analysis demonstrated that both the serum IL-8 level and the expression of IL-8 and CTGF in the liver samples were significantly increased in patients with CHF, consistent with our in vitro human iPS-disease model of CHF.

PARAGRAPH

Loss of fibrocystin function promotes IL-8-dependent proliferation of, and CTGF production by, human cholangiocytes, suggesting that IL-8 and CTGF are essential for the pathogenesis of CHF.

IL-8 and CTGF are candidate molecular targets for the treatment of CHF.

