10.1016/j.jhep.2017.11.022

ABSTRACT

TITLE

Impact of real-time metabolomics in liver transplantation: Graft evaluation and donor-recipient matching

PARAGRAPH

There is an emerging need to assess the metabolic state of liver allografts especially in the novel setting of machine perfusion preservation and donor in cardiac death (DCD) grafts.

High-resolution magic-angle-spinning nuclear magnetic resonance (HR-MAS-NMR) could be a useful tool in this setting as it can extemporaneously provide untargeted metabolic profiling.

The purpose of this study was to evaluate the potential value of HR-MAS-NMR metabolomic analysis of back-table biopsies for the prediction of early allograft dysfunction (EAD) and donor-recipient matching.

PARAGRAPH

The metabolic profiles of back-table biopsies obtained by HR-MAS-NMR, were compared according to the presence of EAD using partial least squares discriminant analysis.

Network analysis was used to identify metabolites which changed significantly.

The profiles were compared to native livers to identify metabolites for donor-recipient matching.

PARAGRAPH

The metabolic profiles were significantly different in grafts that caused EAD compared to those that did not.

The constructed model can be used to predict the graft outcome with excellent accuracy.

The metabolites showing the most significant differences were lactate level >8.3 mmol/g and phosphocholine content >0.646 mmol/g, which were significantly associated with graft dysfunction with an excellent accuracy (AUROClactates = 0.906; AUROCphosphocholine = 0.816).

Native livers from patients with sarcopenia had low lactate and glycerophosphocholine content.

In patients with sarcopenia, the risk of EAD was significantly higher when transplanting a graft with a high-risk graft metabolic score.

PARAGRAPH

This study underlines the cost of metabolic adaptation, identifying lactate and choline-derived metabolites as predictors of poor graft function in both native livers and liver grafts.

HR-MAS-NMR seems a valid technique to evaluate graft quality and the consequences of cold ischemia on the graft.

It could be used to assess the efficiency of graft resuscitation on machine perfusion in future studies.

