10.1016/j.jhep.2019.06.025

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Elimination of hepatitis C virus has limited impact on the functional and mitochondrial impairment of HCV-specific CD8+ T cell responses

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) persists and leads to chronicity in the majority of infected patients.

Chronic hepatitis C is mainly characterized by functional impairment of virus-specific CD8+ T cells.1,2

Several mechanisms have been suggested to lead to functional impairment of HCV-specific CD8+ T cells.

However, the phenomena that have gained most attention for their contribution to failure of virus-specific CD8+ T cell responses are viral escape variants and CD8+ T cell exhaustion.3–5

Persistent antigen stimulation during chronic HCV infection is suggested to lead to exhaustion of virus-specific CD8+ T cells.

Exhausted virus-specific CD8+ T cells in-turn are characterized by the expression of multiple co-regulatory molecules,3 limited proliferative capacity,6 impaired cytokine production3,6 as well as impaired metabolism.7–9

PARAGRAPH

HCV therapy has changed fundamentally since 2013.

Interferon (IFN)-free direct-acting antiviral (DAA) therapies resulted in rapid clearance of HCV from infected patients.

DAA-mediated rapid HCV clearance is also sustained after the end of treatment; a phenomenon termed sustained virologic response (SVR).

Importantly, more than 95% SVR rates can now be achieved with IFN-free DAAs, making these therapies a treatment revolution relative to previous IFN-based treatment modalities.10,11

This makes HCV a unique model to study the effects of clearance of a persistent viral infection on immune responses.

PARAGRAPH

Several groups recently characterized the kinetics of soluble inflammatory mediators, mucosal-associated invariant T cells, gamma delta T cells and natural killer cell diversity during IFN-free DAA therapy.12–20

These studies revealed partially conflicting data, with some studies showing declines in the activation of immune cells and functional improvements, while others suggested long-term imprints of HCV on immune cells that remain largely unchanged by HCV clearance.

Following a first report of improvement of HCV-specific CD8+ T cell proliferative responses after HCV clearance,21 subsequent studies revealed maintenance of HCV-specific CD8+ T cells with memory potential during DAA therapy.22

Nevertheless, a detailed understanding of HCV-specific CD8+ T cell functions, metabolism, regulations and associations with underlying clinical patterns during DAA-mediated HCV clearance is still lacking.

PARAGRAPH

Owing to the rapid cessation of HCV replication and the ensuing abrupt clearance of viral antigens mediated by DAAs, we questioned what the overall repercussions would be on exhausted HCV-specific CD8+ T cells, with a particular focus on clinical parameters, functional responses, metabolic fitness and response to immune-checkpoint blockade.

As a result, we dissected the functional characteristics of HCV-specific CD8+ T cells upon IFN-free DAA therapy-mediated HCV clearance.

SECTION

Materials and methods

SECTION

Study participants

PARAGRAPH

Peripheral whole blood samples were collected from a total of 47 HLA-A*02 positive patients at the liver outpatient clinic of Hannover Medical School.

This included 40 HCV genotype 1 (1a or 1b) infected patients who received various combinations of IFN-free DAA therapies (namely: sofosbuvir, sofosbuvir/ledipasvir, sofosbuvir+simeprevir, sofosbuvir+daclatasvir, sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir, ombitasvir/paritaprevir/ritonavir+dasabuvir, glecaprevir/pibrentasvir or grazoprevir/elbasvir) with or without ribavirin and 7 healthy blood donors.

All selected patients were HBV surface antigen and anti-HIV negative at the time of blood collection.

Of these, a total of 28 patients were non-cirrhotic with only mild fibrosis based on transient elastography and 12 patients had advanced stage liver fibrosis or cirrhosis.

Blood samples collected at baseline (therapy start), End of therapy and 24 weeks following the end of DAA therapy were used for further experiments.

All patients included in this study successfully cleared the virus at the end of therapy with subsequent attainment of SVR.

The serum levels of alanine aminotransferase and aspartate aminotransferase were also normalized in the majority of these patients following HCV clearance.

A summary of patient cohorts and characteristics are provided in Table S1 and Fig. S1.

For further details regarding the materials and methods used, please refer to the CTAT table and supplementary information.

SECTION

Ethics statement

PARAGRAPH

This study was conducted in conformity with declaration of Helsinki (1975).

Prior approval from local ethics committee of Hannover Medical School was obtained (approval number: 2148-2014) and written informed consent was obtained in all cases.

SECTION

Results

SECTION

Limited impact of IFN-free DAA-mediated HCV clearance on the exhausted phenotype of HCV-specific CD8+ T cells during chronic hepatitis C

PARAGRAPH

Attempts at extensively characterizing the phenotypes of HCV-specific CD8+ T cells are often prevented by their low or undetectable frequencies with conventional ex vivo detection methods.

To circumvent this, we employed the peptide MHCI (pMHCI) multimer-based magnetic-bead enrichment technique23,24 which enabled us to not only detect virus-specific CD8+ T cells in all patient samples, at the 3 time points analyzed, but also to comprehensively characterize their phenotypes with considerable quantities of detectable cells (Fig. 1A-E).

A cocktail of dextramers corresponding to 3 immuno-dominant HLA-A*02-restricted epitopes (NS31073-1081, NS31406-1415 and Core132-140) were used for the analyses.

In this regard, we analyzed the expression patterns of exhaustion (PD-1, TIM-3, Lag-3 and CD5), activation (CD38 and HLA-DR), terminal exhaustion (CD39 and CD127-PD1high) and differentiation (CCR7, CD45RA and CD127) markers on HCV-specific CD8+ T cells.

Frequencies and relative expressions of HCV-specific CD8+ T cells expressing the analyzed exhaustion markers were not altered after cessation of HCV replication (Fig. 1B and 1E).

Meanwhile, the elevated frequencies of multimer-specific CD8+ T cells expressing CD38 and CD38 + HLA-DR (Fig. 1C and 1E), as well as terminally exhausted cells expressing CD39 (Fig. 1D and 1E), were significantly reduced following HCV clearance.

Of note, subset differentiation based on CD127 and PD-1 expression did not show significant differences after HCV clearance (Fig. S2A, 2B and Fig. 1E) despite the trend in reduction of the CD127-PD-1high subpopulation.

These data suggest that despite the observed reduction in activation state of HCV-specific CD8+ T cells, IFN-free DAA therapy-mediated HCV clearance does not fully restore the exhausted phenotype of HCV-specific CD8+ T cells during chronic HCV infection.

SECTION

Proliferative capacity of HCV-specific CD8+ T cells is restored in a reduced fraction of patients with chronic HCV infection following HCV clearance

PARAGRAPH

The proliferative capacity of virus-specific CD8+ T cells is limited during chronic HCV infection.6,25

Herein, we assessed whether the proliferative potential of these T cells is restored following DAA therapy-mediated HCV clearance by analyzing the frequencies of multimer-specific CD8+ T cells.

Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were stimulated in vitro for 10 days with HLA-A*02 restricted peptides (NS31073-1081, NS31406-1415 or Core132-140) that correspond to the well described HCV epitopes.

In a combined analysis of in vitro peptide stimulated cells obtained from non-cirrhotic patients, the frequency of epitope-specific CD8+ T cells increased from baseline to 24 weeks after HCV clearance (FU24) (Fig. 2A and 2B).

At an individual level, however, the increase in proliferation occurred in only 8/18 (44.4%) of patients (Fig. 2C).

The T cells isolated from the remaining 10/18 (55.6%) patients did not show increased proliferation in response to any of the analyzed epitopes at FU24 upon in vitro stimulation (Fig. 2C).

Of note, there was no significant increase in proliferative capacity of HCV-specific CD8+ T cells among the cirrhotic cohort with advanced stages of liver disease (Fig. S4A).

PARAGRAPH

Continuous antigen stimulation and hence lack of viral sequence variation at the corresponding epitopes were indicated to be associated with limited proliferative capacity of virus-specific CD8+ T cells during chronic hepatitis C.21 In this study, the majority (87%) of HCV-specific CD8+ T cells recognized the consensus sequence of the epitopes (Fig. 2B, Fig. S3A and Table S2).

In sum, our data suggest that successful clearance of HCV is not capable of completely restoring the proliferative capacity of virus-specific CD8+ T cells and that only partial restoration of HCV-specific CD8+ T cells’ proliferative capacity is achieved following DAA-mediated HCV clearance.

SECTION

Impaired cytokine production by HCV-specific CD8+ T cells remains impaired following cessation of HCV replication by IFN-free DAA therapy

PARAGRAPH

Next, we assessed if the impaired functionality of HCV-specific CD8+ T cells manifested by reduced cytokine production during chronic hepatitis C3,6 is restored upon rapid clearance of HCV.

To this end, we analyzed the frequency of HCV-specific CD8+ T cells producing IFN-γ and MIP-1β, following 10 days of in vitro expansion.

Despite rapid clearance of HCV, IFN-γ and MIP-1β production by HCV-specific CD8+ T cells, as well as polyfunctional IFN-γ + MIP-1β + -producing HCV-specific CD8+ T cells, remained impaired (Fig. 3A-C and Fig. S4B).

Indeed, cytokine production by HCV-specific CD8+ T cells targeting wild-type or variant epitopes also remained invariably impaired during HCV clearance (Fig. 3C and Fig. S3B).

Taken together, our data indicate that cytokine production by HCV-specific CD8+ T cells remains impaired even after rapid elimination of persisting HCV.

SECTION

DAA-mediated HCV clearance does not reverse the altered mitochondrial and metabolic dysfunction of exhausted HCV-specific CD8+ T cells during chronic hepatitis C

PARAGRAPH

The preceding results prompted us to further investigate if cessation of continuous antigen stimulation could impact mitochondrial dysfunction and metabolic fitness of exhausted HCV-specific CD8+ T cells.

This is important since metabolic regulation of virus-specific CD8+ T cells impacts on multiple functional responses.

We first assessed mitochondrial polarization (Fig. 4B and 4C), mass (Fig. 4B and 4D) and reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels (Fig. 4B and 4E) in functional cytomegalovirus (CMV)/Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-specific CD8+ T cells and exhausted HCV-specific CD8+ T cells from healthy blood donors and patients with chronic HCV infection, respectively.

Indeed, we could observe, after overnight anti-CD3 stimulation, that multimer-specific CD8+ T cells from patients with chronic HCV infection exhibit significantly reduced mitochondrial polarization (Fig. 4B) and increased mitochondrial mass (Fig. 4C).

In addition, an elevated mitochondrial ROS level was detected in exhausted HCV-specific CD8+ T cells from patients with chronic HCV infection, unlike in CMV/EBV- specific CD8+ T cells from healthy blood donors (Fig. 4D).

Interestingly, IFN-free DAA-mediated HCV clearance did not significantly reverse the observed mitochondrial dysfunction in multimer-specific CD8+ T cells from patients with chronic hepatitis C (Fig. 4B-D).

PARAGRAPH

Previous reports indicated that exhausted virus-specific CD8+ T cells have distinct metabolic requirements compared to functional virus-specific CD8+ T cells.7,8

Virus-specific CD8+ T cells that respond to chronic infections are reported to be characterized by increased expression of glucose transporter 1 (Glut1)7,8 which leads to a reduction in metabolic plasticity of virus-specific CD8+ T cells.7,8,26

Therefore, we set out to investigate if Glut1 expression during chronic HCV infection could be normalized upon removal of persistent antigen.

Frequencies of Glut1-expressing HCV-specific CD8+ T cells did not show significant alterations 24 weeks following HCV clearance (Fig. S6A, B).

In sum, our data indicate that the altered mitochondrial dysfunction and metabolic dysregulation in exhausted multimer-specific CD8+ T cells are not reversed even after the persisting virus is cleared.

SECTION

DAA-mediated clearance of HCV does not alter memory potential of HCV-specific CD8+ T cells

PARAGRAPH

Immunotherapeutic boosting of virus-specific CD8+ T cell responses could be possible in cells possessing memory potential and self-renewal capability.27–29

Therefore, it was of interest to assess whether removal of HCV by IFN-free DAAs could alter the memory potential of exhausted HCV-specific CD8+ T cells.

Previous reports have demonstrated that in lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus-specific29 and HCV-specific30 CD8+ T cells, T cell factor 1 (Tcf1) expression characterizes cells with a memory-like phenotype and sustains CD8+ T cell responses during persistent infections.

Remarkably, Tcf1-expressing HCV-specific CD8+ T cells in our cohort remain unaltered after HCV clearance (Fig. 5A and 5B).

Previous reports30 and our data (Fig. S2B) indicate that less-differentiated HCV-specific CD8+ T cells, that co-express CD127 and PD-1, are maintained after HCV clearance.

Here, we further demonstrate that the Tcf1+CD127+PD-1+subpopulation is also maintained after HCV clearance (Fig. 5B).

Collectively, our data suggests the presence, after the clearance of HCV, of an HCV-specific CD8+ T cell subpopulation with memory potential, corroborating previous findings on the maintenance of memory-like virus-specific CD8 T cells during chronic infections.

SECTION

Immune-checkpoint inhibition can preferentially increase the proliferative capacity of HCV-specific CD8+ T cells whose proliferative capacity was not restored following HCV clearance

PARAGRAPH

Subsequently, we questioned if functionally impaired HCV-specific CD8+ T cells, which might also harbor memory potential, present after removal of viral antigens could be revived through immune-checkpoint inhibition.

This is very important as PD-1/PD-L1 blocking therapy, for example, is being used to treat chronic infections and cancer.31

In addition to the 10 days of in vitro peptide stimulation discussed above, PBMCs were cultured with antibodies targeting PD-L1 and TIM-3 pathways on both day 0 and day 10.

Blockade of PD-1/PD-L1 or TIM-3 pathways as well as the simultaneous blockade of the 2 pathways together resulted in enhanced proliferation of some of HCV-specific CD8+ T cells after HCV clearance (Fig. 6A and 6B).

However, in line with our previous reports,3 we could observe heterogeneous responses to immune checkpoint blockade responses at all 3 time points (Fig. 6A and 6B).

Interestingly, HCV-specific CD8+ T cells that did not restore their proliferative capacity following cessation of HCV stimulation with IFN-free DAAs were able to preferentially increase their proliferation upon blockade of the PD-1/PD-L1 pathway (Fig. 6B).

In contrast, blockade of PD-1/PD-L1 pathway in HCV-specific CD8+ T cells that have already increased their proliferative capacity upon removal of HCV triggering resulted in either no change in proliferation or even reduced proliferative capacity in some cases (Fig. 6A).

Furthermore, there was a positive but not significant correlation between Tcf1 expression and HCV-specific CD8+ T cell responses to PD-1/PD-L1 blockade (data not shown).

Taken together, our data suggest that HCV-specific CD8+ T cells that could not restore their proliferative capacity upon clearance of HCV can preferentially revive their proliferative capacity through tailored immune-checkpoint inhibition.

SECTION

Proliferative response of HCV-specific CD8+ T cells following HCV clearance are associated with underlying clinical patterns of patients

PARAGRAPH

We then directed our investigation to see if underlying clinical and pathological characteristics could serve as predictive values for the diverse proliferative responses observed between patients following HCV clearance.

In this light, patients were grouped based on baseline age, sex, liver inflammation, liver stiffness, and viral loads immediately before starting therapy.

We could observe that female sex was associated with better proliferative response (ratio of HCV multimer-specific CD8+ T cell frequency at FU24 vs. treatment start) after HCV clearance (Fig. 7A).

In addition, proliferative response of HCV-specific CD8+ T cells upon HCV clearance was significantly higher in patients with lower liver inflammation as measured by lower ALT levels (Fig. 7B).

Likewise, HCV-specific CD8+ T cells from patients with lower liver stiffness value (<9.5 KPa) at baseline, and hence lower stage of liver damage, had a significantly improved proliferative response after clearance of HCV (Fig. 7C).

Of note, in this cohort, HCV-specific CD8+ T cells proliferative response during HCV clearance did not differ based on patients’ age, baseline viral load and previous IFN-based therapies.

In conclusion, these data suggest that divergent and individualized HCV-specific CD8+ T cell proliferative responses observed during HCV clearance could partly be associated with underlying clinico-pathological patterns of patients.

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

In this study, we comprehensively analyzed the main functional characteristics of exhausted HCV-specific CD8+ T cells during successful IFN-free DAA-mediated cure of HCV.

We probed in detail the phenotypes of detectable exhausted HCV-specific CD8+ T cells during therapy mediated clearance of HCV.

Importantly, we could show that impaired HCV-specific CD8+ T cell responses during chronic HCV infection, evidenced by limited proliferative capacity6 and defective cytokine production,3,6 are not restored in the majority of patients following successful HCV clearance.

Indeed, HCV-specific CD8+ T cell proliferative responses during HCV clearance could partly be predicted by underlying clinico-pathological patterns of the patients.

Most importantly, we hereby provided a firsthand investigation of the impact of completely clearing HCV on mitochondrial and metabolic functions of virus-specific CD8+ T cells.

Moreover, we assessed the impact of an in vitro immune-checkpoint blockade on HCV-specific CD8+ T cells during HCV clearance.

Collectively, our data implies that IFN-free DAA-mediated HCV clearance does not fully re-constitute exhausted HCV-specific CD8+ T cells during chronic hepatitis C.

PARAGRAPH

Compelling data suggest that exhausted HCV-specific CD8+ T cells during chronic HCV infection upregulate expression of multiple co-regulatory molecules including but not limited to PD-1, TIM-3, Lag-3, CD5 and 2B4.32–34

Our data, however, suggests that clearance of persistent antigens per se is not sufficient to reverse the upregulated expression of the analyzed co-regulatory molecules during HCV clearance.

Prolonged exposure to persisting antigen leads to the long-lasting presence of activated and ultimately differentiated virus-specific CD8+ T cells30,35,36 that lack effector functions.37

Our results showing a reduction in activated HCV multimer-specific CD8+ T cells could be due to the associated loss of CD39-expressing terminally differentiated multimer-specific CD8+ T cells36 after viral eradication.

Indeed, previous studies have also showed that overtly-activated terminally differentiated antigen-specific CD8+ T cells cannot survive following removal of the ongoing antigen.4,30,35,36

PARAGRAPH

One major question that needs to be addressed in patients attaining SVR is whether the ensuing virus-specific CD8+ T cells are able to provide protection against re-infection.

Indeed, several cases of re-infection with HCV have been reported in patients who already cleared HCV with DAAs.38,39

Interestingly, studies performed in chimpanzee models indicated that virus-specific CD8+ T cells present after DAA-mediated HCV clearance failed to prevent development of chronicity after re-infection.40

In the human HCV infection model, specific restoration of the proliferative capacity of HCV-epitope-specific CD8+ T cells was reported in the majority (82%) of patients after HCV cure.21

In contrast, our data suggest a partial restoration of proliferative capacity in less than half of patients analyzed.

In addition, cytokine production by HCV-specific CD8+ T cells following HCV clearance remained impaired in our cohort, further supporting persistence of functionally impaired HCV-specific CD8+ T cells following cessation of antigen stimulation.

Possible reasons for these discrepancies might be the different socio-demographic and clinical backgrounds of patients or the type of DAA drugs and inclusion of ribavirin.

Indeed, patients included in our cohort received 8 different types of IFN-free DAAs (5 sofosbuvir-based and 3 without sofosbuvir) (Table S1) unlike patients in the former studies where mainly non-sofosbuvir but protease inhibitor based DAAs were administered to patients.21

Of note, inhibition of the HCV protease may have additional effects on innate immunity41 which may also influence adaptive immune responses.

Notably, the majority of HCV-specific CD8+ T cells which could significantly restore their proliferative capacity in our study were derived from patients who received DAAs that do not contain sofosbuvir but protease inhibitors (Fig. S5A,B).

Additional studies are required to determine if distinct DAAs may display differential effects on cellular immune responses.

Preliminary findings from our group indicate that CMV/EBV-specific CD8+ T cells derived from patients who received protease inhibitors may display an increased proliferative capacity at FU24 (data not shown).

Furthermore, the epitopes targeted could have also played a role in the discrepancies observed among studies.

Unfortunately, HLA B27 epitopes could not be studied in detail here due to limited numbers of patients.

It is possible that findings will be different for this immune dominant epitope as shown previously.21

We were not able to expand NS5B2841-249 specific CD8+ T cells sufficiently to explore this question in detail (data not shown).

We also have to highlight that we only studied HCV genotype 1-infected patients to exclude potential impacts of different HCV genotypes.

There were no differences between genotype 1a and 1b infected patients in this study.

PARAGRAPH

Notably, the clinical backgrounds of patients included in this study also played a role in the observed heterogeneous proliferative responses following HCV clearance (Fig. 7).

Interestingly, female sex and absence of advanced fibrosis were associated with better restoration of HCV-specific T cell proliferation in our cohort.

These factors were associated with SVR when treatment regimens with suboptimal antiviral efficacy were used (e.g. sofosbuvir+ribavirin)42).

Collectively, these data suggest that the ensuing HCV-specific CD8+ T cells after DAA-mediated HCV clearance still remain largely impaired in their antiviral responses, with possible implications for re-infection or the use of suboptimal DAA regimens.

In fact, the persistence of exhausted HCV-specific CD8+ T cells following HCV clearance might have clinical implications beyond re-infection, affecting the persistence of extrahepatic manifestations,43 the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) recurrence (supported by our recent findings on HCC-specific T cells44), as well as possible risk of reactivation of unrelated viruses like HBV and herpes simplex virus.

PARAGRAPH

Persistent HCV infection silences, and sometimes completely abrogates, HCV-specific CD8+ T cell responses through several mechanisms.

In addition to continual antigen triggering-induced virus-specific CD8+ T cell exhaustion, loss of CD4 T cell help,45 presence of immune modulating cytokines46 and inability to recognize viral epitopes because of viral escape variants5 also play a role in functional impairment of virus-specific CD8+ T cells during chronic infections.

Importantly, the vast majority (87%) of epitope-specific CD8+ T cells in our cohort recognized wild-type epitope sequences (Fig. S3 and Table S2).

Notably, we did not observe a major difference in proliferative capacity or cytokine production capabilities between cells recognizing conserved epitopes and cells targeting escape variants during HCV clearance (Fig. S3).

This could be due to the reduced number (17%) of cells that failed to recognize antigens due to variant epitopes in our cohort.

Meanwhile, in previous studies, where nearly half of epitope-specific CD8+ T cells recognized variant sequence, a better restoration of proliferative capacity after HCV clearance was reported for CD8+ T cells that target wild-type sequences.21

Thus, upon inclusion of more patients, it is possible that the repercussions of HCV clearance in virus-specific CD8+ T cells with persistent T cell receptor stimulation might differ from cells that do not recognize viral antigen due to escape variants.

PARAGRAPH

Mitochondrial plasticity and bioenergetics dynamically influence T cell functionality and survival at various levels.7–9,47,48

Indeed, polarization of mitochondria and ROS levels are shown to be associated with activation47,49 as well as cell death50 of T cells.

Therefore, we wondered how successful halting of persistent antigen triggering could impact mitochondrial polarization, ROS level and mitochondrial mass.

In this study, we showed that HCV-specific CD8+ T cells during chronic HCV display altered mitochondrial dysfunction mainly characterized by depolarized mitochondria, increased ROS level and mass biogenesis compared to CMV/ EBV-specific CD8+ T cells isolated from HCV negative persons.

The increased abundance of mitochondrial mass in exhausted HCV-specific CD8+ T cells could be due to defects in mitophagy, a cellular process of removing damaged dysfunctional mitochondria to maintain proper physiological functions of cells.51

On the other hand, the observed accumulation of mitochondrial ROS in HCV-specific CD8+ T cells can serve a dual role in firing-up activation and cellular degeneration52 subsequently leading to exhaustion of T cells.

Intriguingly, mitochondrial dysfunction in HCV-specific CD8+ T cells was not normalized after HCV clearance.

Furthermore, we showed that Glut-1 expression on HCV-specific CD8+ T cells remained unaltered after HCV clearance.

To the best of our knowledge, there was no other study that investigated repercussions of persistent antigen clearance on the mitochondrial functionality of virus-specific CD8+ T cells.

PARAGRAPH

Notably, DAA-mediated HCV clearance did not affect the memory potential of HCV-specific CD8+ T cells.

Tcf-1-expressing HCV-specific CD8 T cells, which in principle have improved recall response and proliferative capacity independent of antigen,29,30,27,29 remained stable after HCV elimination in our cohort.

Thus, we wondered if further immunotherapeutic re-invigoration of HCV-specific CD8+ T cells could be possible after HCV clearance.

Remarkably, HCV-specific CD8+ T cells whose proliferative capacity could not be restored following HCV clearance selectively re-invigorated their proliferative potential upon in vitro PD-1/PD-L1 pathway blockade.

This is in line with our previous report suggesting individualized heterogeneous responses to targeting of co-regulatory receptor blockades3 and clinical trials that indicated efficacy of checkpoint blockade in less than half of patients with chronic HCV.53,54

To the best of our knowledge, no other study has previously described effects of immune-checkpoint blockade in exhausted virus-specific CD8+ T cells from which the persisting antigen has successfully been cleared.

One limitation of this study is that we have no complete data on Tcf1 expression for all experiments, e.g. when we blocked both PD-L1 and TIM-3.

We suggest that virus-specific CD8+ T cells that restored their proliferative capacity following HCV clearance might have differentiated terminally and further immunotherapeutic interferences, such as checkpoint blockades, have no further effect.

In contrast, cells which could not proliferate after HCV clearance might not have been ultimately differentiated and could still have possessed self-differentiation27,30 capacity upon blockade of immune-checkpoints.

In summary, this comprehensive study of functionally and metabolically impaired peripheral HCV-specific CD8+ T cells during DAA-mediated HCV clearance provides compelling evidence that successful cessation of HCV stimulation does not universally restore HCV-specific CD8+ T cell functional responses and metabolism.

These results might have implications in case of re-infection with HCV, for persistence of extrahepatic manifestations and for HCV vaccine development, as we also defined subgroups of patients that may mount sufficient immunity to potentially protect from re-infection.

Finally, the data on mitochondrial dysfunction and immune-checkpoint blockade open scenarios for alternative treatment options to enhance antiviral immunity.

Thus, HCV can serve as an in vivo human model to investigate the impact of a complete clearance of a persisting viral infection on immune responses, as well as on the clinical sequelae associated with viral infections in general.

Indeed, investigations that look at HCV-specific CD8+ T cell responses beyond 6 months of follow-up are needed to understand the long-term impact of HCV cure.

Further studies also need to consider the impact of successful IFN-free DAA-mediated HCV clearance on virus-specific CD8+ T cells residing inside the liver, which is the site of HCV replication.

SECTION

Financial support

PARAGRAPH

This work was supported by centre for research grants SFB900 ‘‘Chronic Infections: Microbial Persistence and its Control’’ and SFB 738 of the German Research Foundation (DFG), the IFB-Tx (BMBF 01E01302), German Centre for Infection Research (DZIF) and centre for infection Biology of Hannover Biomedical Research School.

SECTION

Conflict of interest

PARAGRAPH

Please refer to the accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.

SECTION

Authors’ contributions

PARAGRAPH

AA, SOS, HW and MC were involved in designing of experiments, drafting and revision of the manuscript.

KD, KP and MPM were involved in recruitment of patients.

JD, CB and CS sequenced the HCV epitopes.

AA acquired and analyzed the data.

HW and MC were involved in study concept inception, approval and finalization of the manuscript.

All authors read and agreed to the manuscript.