10.1016/j.jhep.2017.11.040

ABSTRACT

TITLE

Gasdermin D plays a key role as a pyroptosis executor of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis in humans and mice

PARAGRAPH

Gasdermin D (GSDMD)-executed programmed necrosis is involved in inflammation and controls interleukin (IL)-1β release.

However, the role of GSDMD in non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) remains unclear.

We investigated the role of GSDMD in the pathogenesis of steatohepatitis.

PARAGRAPH

Human liver tissues from patients with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and control individuals were obtained to evaluate GSDMD expression.

Gsdmd knockout (Gsdmd−/−) mice, obese db/db mice and their wild-type (WT) littermates were fed with methionine-choline deficient (MCD) or control diet to induce steatohepatitis.

The Gsdmd−/− and WT mice were also used in a high-fat diet (HFD)-induced NAFLD model.

In addition, Alb-Cre mice were administered an adeno-associated virus (AAV) vector that expressed the gasdermin-N domain (AAV9-FLEX-GSDMD-N) and were fed with either MCD or control diet for 10 days.

PARAGRAPH

GSDMD and its pyroptosis-inducing fragment GSDMD-N were upregulated in liver tissues of human NAFLD/NASH.

Importantly, hepatic GSDMD-N protein levels were significantly higher in human NASH and correlated with the NAFLD activity score and fibrosis.

GSDMD-N remained a potential biomarker for the diagnosis of NASH.

MCD-fed Gsdmd−/− mice exhibit decreased severity of steatosis and inflammation compared with WT littermates.

GSDMD was associated with the secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1β, TNF-α, and MCP-1 [CCL2]) and persistent activation of the NF-ĸB signaling pathway.

Gsdmd−/− mice showed lower steatosis, mainly because of reduced expression of the lipogenic gene Srebp1c (Srebf1) and upregulated expression of lipolytic genes, including Pparα, Aco [Klk15], Lcad [Acadl], Cyp4a10 and Cyp4a14.

Alb-Cre mice administered with AAV9-FLEX-GSDMD-N showed significantly aggravated steatohepatitis when fed with MCD diet.

PARAGRAPH

As an executor of pyroptosis, GSDMD plays a key role in the pathogenesis of steatohepatitis, by controlling cytokine secretion, NF-ĸB activation, and lipogenesis.

