10.1016/j.jhep.2019.02.022

ABSTRACT

TITLE

F-actin dynamics regulates mammalian organ growth and cell fate maintenance

PARAGRAPH

In vitro, cell function can be potently regulated by the mechanical properties of cells and of their microenvironment.

Cells measure these features by developing forces via their actomyosin cytoskeleton, and respond accordingly by regulating intracellular pathways, including the transcriptional coactivators YAP/TAZ.

Whether mechanical cues are relevant for in vivo regulation of adult organ homeostasis, and whether this occurs through YAP/TAZ, remains largely unaddressed.

PARAGRAPH

We developed Capzb conditional knockout mice and obtained primary fibroblasts to characterize the role of CAPZ in vitro.

In vivo functional analyses were carried out by inducing Capzb inactivation in adult hepatocytes, manipulating YAP/Hippo activity by hydrodynamic tail vein injections, and treating mice with the ROCK inhibitor, fasudil.

PARAGRAPH

We found that the F-actin capping protein CAPZ restrains actomyosin contractility: Capzb inactivation alters stress fiber and focal adhesion dynamics leading to enhanced myosin activity, increased traction forces, and increased liver stiffness.

In vitro, this rescues YAP from inhibition by a small cellular geometry; in vivo, it induces YAP activation in parallel to the Hippo pathway, causing extensive hepatocyte proliferation and leading to striking organ overgrowth.

Moreover, Capzb is required for the maintenance of the differentiated hepatocyte state, for metabolic zonation, and for gluconeogenesis.

In keeping with changes in tissue mechanics, inhibition of the contractility regulator ROCK, or deletion of the Yap1 mechanotransducer, reverse the phenotypes emerging in Capzb-null livers.

PARAGRAPH

These results indicate a previously unsuspected role for CAPZ in tuning the mechanical properties of cells and tissues, which is required in hepatocytes for the maintenance of the differentiated state and to regulate organ size.

More generally, it indicates for the first time that mechanotransduction has a physiological role in maintaining liver homeostasis in mammals.

