10.1016/j.jhep.2019.02.016

ABSTRACT

TITLE

OX40 stimulation and PD-L1 blockade synergistically augment HBV-specific CD4 T cells in patients with HBeAg-negative infection

PARAGRAPH

Current antiviral therapies lack the potential to eliminate persistent hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection.

HBV-specific T cells are crucial for HBV control and have recently been shown to be protective in patients following discontinuation of antiviral therapy.

Thus, T cell-based approaches may greatly improve the therapeutic landscape of HBV infection.

We aimed to augment HBV-specific CD4 T cells from chronically infected patients by targeting different immunological pathways.

PARAGRAPH

Expression of various co-stimulatory and inhibitory receptors on HBV- and influenza-specific CD4 T cells was analyzed directly ex vivo by MHC class II-tetramers.

Patients infected with HBV genotype D were screened for CD4 T cell responses by IFN-γ ELISpot and intracellular cytokine staining following stimulation with overlapping peptides (OLPs) spanning the HBV-polyprotein.

Stimulation with recombinant IL-7, an agonistic OX40-antibody or blockade of PD-L1 was performed in antigen-specific in vitro cultures.

Cytokine secretion and expression of transcription factors were analyzed by flow cytometry.

Responses targeting influenza, Epstein-Barr virus and tetanus toxoid served as controls.

PARAGRAPH

Tetramer-staining revealed that the IL-7 receptor-alpha (CD127), OX40 and PD-1 constitute possible therapeutic targets as they were all strongly expressed on HBV-specific CD4 T cells ex vivo.

The HBV-specific CD4 T cell responses identified by OLP screening targeted predominantly the HBV-polymerase and core proteins.

Combined OX40 stimulation and PD-L1 blockade significantly augmented IFN-γ and IL-21 producing HBV-specific CD4 T cells in vitro, suggesting active T helper type 1 cell and follicular T helper cell programs.

Indeed, transcription factors T-bet and Bcl6 were strongly expressed in cytokine-producing cells.

PARAGRAPH

Combined OX40 stimulation and PD-L1 blockade augmented secretion of the helper T cell signature cytokines IFN-γ and IL-21, suggesting that immunotherapeutic approaches can improve HBV-specific CD4 T cell responses.

