10.1016/j.jasrep.2018.10.018

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Study on the ancient putty from the site of the Ming Dynasty (1368–1644 CE) Baochuanchang Shipyard, Nanjing, China

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

China used to hold the leading position in shipbuilding technology before the industrial revolution (Fang et al., 2013; Li, 2006).

The invention of the sealing material with high waterproofing and bonding properties made a great contribution for ancient Chinese craftsmen to build huge ships for oversea voyage.

Historical sources describe this material as a mixture of boiled tung oil, lime and oakum (optional) (Fang et al., 2013; Song, 1637).

It was called “nianliao” in Chinese while Worcester (1971) called it “chu-nam putty”.

PARAGRAPH

Archaeological research of ancient ships usually focused on the shipbuilding techniques such as general constructions and timber elements (Allevato et al., 2010; Gibbins and Adams, 2001; Howitz, 1977).

Just a few scholars (Wright and Churchill, 1965) paid attention to the caulking and sealing materials of ancient wooden ships.

Connan and Nissenbaum (2003) identified conifer resin as the protective cover on the ship timbers or the caulking material used on the Ma'agan Mikhael ship (500 BCE).

The shipwrecks of the Etruscan and Roman ages found at the ancient harbor of San Rossore, Italy were investigated by Colombini (Colombini et al., 2003).

The waterproofing and caulking materials were identified as a pitch obtained from the Pinaceae tree, and the painting materials were revealed as Pinaceae resins together with beeswax.

Deforce (Deforce et al., 2014) studied the caulking material from shipwrecks of two 14th century maritime cargo vessels excavated from the port of Antwerp, northern Belgium, which was mainly composed by mosses.

However, these caulking materials were far different from the chu-nam putty.

Although the ancient lime-based mortars were widely studied in the field of architecture (Fang et al., 2014; Yang et al., 2010; Zeng et al., 2008), the lime putty that excavated from the unearthed shipwrecks were overlooked (Wang, 1983; Yuan, 2006).

Very few studies had been reported on the components and characteristics of the lime putty.

Fang's team (Fang et al., 2013; Fang et al., 2014) have done a great job on the study of chu-nam putty from a Song Dynasty wooden ship called “Huaguang No.1”.

Their research identified the components of the ancient putty as tung oil, lime and jute by the means of FT-IR, XRD, and SEM etc., and further discussed its formula, performance and mechanism.

However, there is a lack of direct evidence for proving the use of tung oil due to its rare content.

Moreover, the actual formula of the putty of different times or areas might be different, thus, it is worth to be studied comprehensively.

PARAGRAPH

In China, people generally know the chu-nam putty through ancient records (Song, 1637).

Besides the famous book “Tian Gong Kai Wu” (named as “Heavenly Creations”, which is the technological encyclopedia of the Ming Dynasty), the detailed records of making and using chu-nam putty could be found in “Nan Chuan Ji” (Records of the Southern Ships) (Shen, 1541) and “Long jiang Chuan Chang Zhi” (Records of the Longjiang Shipyard) (Li, 1553) as well.

Unfortunately, due to the policy of forbidding sea voyages in the late Ming Dynasty (1522–1566 CE), almost all the literatures of the shipbuilding techniques of oceangoing vessels were destroyed, including the records of Zheng He's fleet which sailed across the Indian Ocean (Zheng He's expedition 1405–1433 CE).

Zheng He (1371–1433 CE) is a well-known navigator and diplomatist of the Ming Dynasty, the flagship of his fleet was believed to be the world's hugest wooden vessel at that time which might have a much heavier load than the famous Santa Maria of Columbus who sailed across the Atlantic Ocean almost a century later (Zhang, 2004).

Over the years, much effort has been made to estimate the structure and tonnage of Zheng He's treasure ships in spite of the lack of knowledge on the shipbuilding technology in his time, however, the sealing material used was barely known.

PARAGRAPH

In 2003, the rescuing excavation of the Ming Dynasty site ‘Liuzuotang’ of ‘Baochuanchang’ Shipyard was carried out in Nanjing and executed by Nanjing Municipal Museum.

Several wooden components such as large-sized rudderstocks and decks along with some metal shipbuilding tools and ancient putty pieces were found here (Nanjing Municipal Museum, 2006).

In Chinese, “Baochuanchang” 宝船厂 means “Shipyard of Treasure Ships” which specifically referred to the ships that Zheng He took to sail across the Indian Ocean, and “liuzuotang” 六作塘 means “the No.6 boatyard”.

The shipyard was officially completed and put into operation at the 3rd year of Emperor Yongle (1405 CE) for the manufacture of huge ships for the well-known expeditions to the Western Oceans directed by Zheng He (Nanjing Municipal Museum, 2006).

Thus, the putty excavated might be the same as those used on the ships of the famous Zheng He's fleet.

PARAGRAPH

In this paper, the analytical results of the ancient putty that excavated from the site Baochuanchang Shipyard were presented.

The inorganic and organic components of the putty were determined by XRD and Py-GC–MS respectively.

The fibers found inside the putty were observed and identified by polarizing microscope and SEM.

Besides, surface morphology and pore size distribution of the sample were studied by SEM and gas adsorption-desorption analysis.

These results overall revealed the formula and quality of the putty, which may provide reference for studying Zheng He's vessels and further make contributions to the conservation and restoration of ancient wooden ships of the Ming Dynasty.

SECTION

Materials and methods

SECTION

Materials

PARAGRAPH

The ancient putty analyzed in this research was a small piece of irregular-shaped clump with a color of cream.

It was weighed 14.2 g with approximate 3 cm in length and 2.5 cm in width.

A small amount of yellow plant fibers with the length about 2 cm were found inside the putty, and were sampled with 2 mg for analysis.

The sample was hard to the touch, and the structure was quite solid with low grindability (Fig. 1).

SECTION

Methods

SECTION

XRD

PARAGRAPH

About 0.5 g of the sample was grinded and analyzed by X-ray diffraction (TTR-III, REGAKU, Japan) to identify the mineralogical phases.

The sample was spread on the surface of a flat silicon wafer using ethanol.

A Bruker-AXS D8 FOCUS diffractometer equipped with an X-ray tube (Cu–Kα radiation: 1.5406 Å, 40 kV and 40 mA) was used for the investigation.

The diffraction patterns were generally collected over a 2θ range from 10° to 70°, with a scanning rate of 4° min−1 and a step size of 0.02°.

The processing of the spectra was performed with Jade 5.0.

SECTION

Py-GC–MS

PARAGRAPH

10 mg of the sample was grinded, and approximately 1 mg was injected together with trimethylsulfonium hydroxide (TMSH) which performed as a methylation agent for the thermally-assisted derivatisation of pyrolysis products.

The Py-GC–MS analysis was carried out by using a PY-2020D pyrolyzer (Frontier, Japan) coupled to a GC–MS OP2010 (Shimadzu, Japan) equipped with a DB-5 ms capillary column (30 m ∗ 0.25 mm i.d ∗ 0.25 μm), the carrier gas was Helium.

The temperature of the GC injection port was set at 300 °C, while the column was set at 50 °C with the heating rate of 10 °C/min up to 300 °C and held for 10 min.

The MS was operated in electron ionization mode (EI) at 70 eV.

Masses were scanned over the range of 50–600 amu.

For reference, the standard C16:0 and C18:0 fatty acids and tung oil (bought from the local market) were tested following the same method.

SECTION

Polarizing microscope

PARAGRAPH

Polarizing microscope (Carl Zeiss Axio Scope A1, Germany) was used to identify the species of the plant fiber found inside the putty.

The fibers were colored by Herzberg's stain (Giorgi et al., 2002) (I2-ZnCl2 solution) and separated by needle before observation.

SECTION

SEM

PARAGRAPH

Scanning electron microscope (SIRION200, FEI Co., USA) was applied to capture the internal and external surface morphology of the putty sample.

The cross section of plant fiber was observed by SEM as well, on a JSM-6700F (JEOL, Japan) instrument.

All the samples were coated with gold beforehand and high vacuum mode was set for the observation.

SECTION

Gas adsorption-desorption analysis

PARAGRAPH

A small broken piece of the sample was measured by gas adsorption analysis.

Nitrogen adsorption isotherms at 77.4 K were measured on a conventional static instrument (TriStar II 3020, Micromeritics, USA).

Prior to the measurement the sample was outgassed at room temperature for 48 h.

It took 9 h to obtain a full adsorption-desorption isotherm.

The distribution of pore size was determined by Barrett-Joiner-Halenda (BJH) method (Barrett et al., 1951).

SECTION

Results

PARAGRAPH

As presented in the XRD pattern (Fig. 2), calcite is the principle phrase which indicated the ancient putty was made from lime-based mortar.

And quartz (SiO2) was probably from the components of limestone.

The presence of quartz therefore suggests the use of limestone rather than shell to produce the lime in the putty.

Besides, whewelite (CaC2O4·H2O, a kind of carboxylate) is hydrated calcium oxalate which probably was the reaction product of slaked lime (Ca(OH)2) with the organic components of the putty.

Since possibly most of the Ca(OH)2 turned into CaCO3 after 600-years' burial, its diffraction curve was not found.

PARAGRAPH

The interpretation of the Py-GC–MS analyses was based on the comparison of the derivatisation of pyrolysis products between the putty and tung oil.

As shown in Fig. 3, the pyrolysis products of the ancient putty and tung oil presented the typical profiles of standard C16:0 and C18:0 fatty acids.

In addition, C18:3 fatty acid was identified from both the derivatisation of pyrolysis products of the ancient putty and tung oil with corresponding retention times.

Tung oil is a drying oil consists of α-eleostearic acid (82%), linoleic acid (8.5%), palmitic acid (5.5%) and oleic acid (4%) (Žlahtič et al., 2017).

Including in α-eleostearic acid, C18:3 fatty acid contains conjugated double bonds that have ability to undergo cross-linking reactions and polymerization upon curing (Fang et al., 2013; Schönemann and Edwards, 2011).

While C18:0 fatty acid is quite stable, this resulted in the lower relative content of C18:3 fatty acid than that of C18:0 fatty acid in the ancient putty.

However, without curing, it could not happen in fresh tung oil.

The quantified peak areas were accounted in Table 1 for the derivatisation of pyrolysis products of the tung oil and ancient putty.

The ratio that derived from comparing %area of C16:0 to C18:0 was calculated to be 1.16 for the ancient putty, which is very close to that of tung oil (1.28).

In Fig. 4, the MS spectra of C16:0, C18:0 and C18:3 fatty acids that generated from the derivatisation of pyrolysis products of the ancient putty were provided with the standard profiles respectively.

It also indicated that tung oil is highly possible contained in the ancient putty.

Further refer to the historical literatures, the sealing material that used in ancient shipbuilding process normally consisted of boiled tung oil, lime and oakum (Fang et al., 2013; Song, 1637).

Therefore, tung oil was reckoned to be applied in the ancient putty for waterproofing purpose.

PARAGRAPH

The fibers found inside the putty were observed by polarizing microscope and SEM, respectively.

As seen from Fig. 5B, the fiber was quite thin and long with a high slenderness ratio, which matched with the characteristics of bast fiber (hemp, jute, flax etc.) (Wang, 1999).

In addition, the cross section of the fiber shown in Fig. 5A presented a form of hexagon, which matched with the feature of jute.

Thus, it is inferred that the fibers inside the putty might be jute.

PARAGRAPH

Overall, the major components of the ancient putty were identified as calcite, tung oil and jute, which matched with the ancient records of chu-nam putty.

Therefore, the ancient putty excavated from the site of Baochuangchang Shipyard should be the chu-nam putty, which normally used in sealing wooden ships.

PARAGRAPH

The surface morphology of the putty was captured by SEM and presented in Fig. 6.

It is observed that the surface is quite compact since very few pores exist.

Moreover, calcite particles are well-configured with two major shapes which are ball-shaped and sheet-shaped.

The formation of dissimilar morphology may be caused by the existence of organic components in the putty (Huang et al., 2007; Kitamura et al., 2002; Pach et al., 1996).

PARAGRAPH

Distribution of pore size in the putty was measured by gas adsorption analysis and the results are given in Fig. 7.

The capillary condensation step in the P/P0 range of 0.75–0.95 indicated a wide distribution in size of the pores (Wei et al., 2012).

The pore size distribution was calculated using BJH method.

The diameters of pores were centered in the range of 200–600 Å, which could be attributed to the degradation of organic components and the existence of silica sand.

The pores of the chu-nam putty would grow bigger over the time until it becomes very weak and needs to be replaced before expiry.

As pointed by Lovegrove (Li, 2008), this could happen after used for about 30 years.

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

The analyses above exhibited the distinct formula of the ancient putty excavated from the site of Baochuanchang Shipyard.

The putty analyzed is made up of both inorganic and organic components.

And the original raw materials should be lime, tung oil and jute, which identified the putty as the so-called chu-nam putty.

PARAGRAPH

According to Chen's research (Chen et al., 2014), the capacity for salt tolerance of soiled building material would be raised with some dopant of cement, and the active ingredients are silicates.

This explains the employing of quartz in the putty, and also suggests the use of limestone instead of shells to produce the lime.

For ensuring a better performance, the lime from limestone is more suitable than that from conchs in making sealing material used on oceangoing ships.

PARAGRAPH

Tung oil belongs to the group of drying oils and is extracted from the nuts of tung tree (Žlahtič et al., 2017).

Due to the high level of unsaturation (Huang et al., 2018), tung oil is easy to cure and possesses good waterproofing properties.

It was used in China for many centuries (before Christ), mainly in painting and protecting wooden objects, such as ship (Blackmon, 1947).

As mentioned in historical sources, boiled tung oil, lime and oakum were normally used in the sealing material for ancient shipbuilding (Fang et al., 2013; Song, 1637).

And the Py-GC–MS results here evidenced directly the use of tung oil in the ancient putty.

In our previous work (Yu et al., 2017), the ratio of tung oil in the sample was identified to be relatively high, which was different from the ancient records.

Generally speaking, tung oil should be easily polymerized in the air (Wexler, 1964), and the hydrophobic groups in the produced polymer would improve the waterproofing property of the putty.

In addition, the carboxylates could react with Ca(OH)2 and form coordination compounds (Lu and Miller, 2002), which could further improve the binding property of the putty.

Although the high content of tung oil might result in longer time of carbonation and drying of the putty, better waterproofing and binding properties would be more significant for the long-time oversea voyages of Zheng He's fleet.

PARAGRAPH

Moreover, natural fibers, for instance jute, flax and hemp were normally applied in clay-based artefacts to prevent cracking and increase binding property.

Jute has a long history of cultivating in China, and is commonly planted in Jiangsu province (Nanjing is the capital city of Jiangsu province), Zhejiang province and Fujian province (Fang et al., 2013).

It was widely used in ancient China for making paper, textile and clay statue.

Since ancient people tended to maintain low costs by utilizing accessible materials in manufacture, jute was probably collected locally and applied in making the putty.

The mixture of jute would assist in promoting the toughness of the putty and prevent it from cracking after drying.

PARAGRAPH

At the end, the results of SEM and gas adsorption-desorption analyses indicated the putty was quite compact with relatively tiny pores.

It further reflected that the putty was well preserved and possessed good sealing properties.

SECTION

Conclusions

PARAGRAPH

Zheng He's expedition crossed the Indian Ocean was a milestone recorded in Chinese marine history.

However, due to a lack of historical records, the shipbuilding technologies used on Zheng He's ships especially the sealing material remains unknown.

In this paper, the ancient putty excavated from the site of the Ming Dynasty Baochuangchang Shipyard was analyzed.

The results proved that the putty is the so-called chu-nam putty mainly consisted of calcite, quartz and carboxylates.

Tung oil was applied as waterproofing agent and the mixture of jute was used to prevent the putty from crack.

In addition, employed with high content of tung oil would improve the waterproofing and binding properties of the putty, which could effectively ensure a long-time oversea voyage.

These results overall revealed the sealing material that used in shipbuilding at the Baochuanchang Shipyard.

It may also provide reference for studying Zheng He's vessels and further make contributions to the conservation and restoration of ancient wooden ships of the Ming Dynasty.