10.1016/j.jhep.2019.07.015

ABSTRACT

TITLE

Comparative characterization of B cells specific for HBV nucleocapsid and envelope proteins in patients with chronic hepatitis B

PARAGRAPH

Knowledge about the regulation of anti-HBV humoral immunity during natural HBV infection is limited.

We recently utilized dual fluorochrome-conjugated HBsAg to demonstrate, in patients with chronic HBV (CHB) infection, the functional impairment of their HBsAg-specific B cells.

However, the features of their HBcAg-specific B cells are unknown.

Here we developed a method to directly visualize, select and characterize HBcAg-specific B cells in parallel with HBsAg-specific B cells.

PARAGRAPH

Fluorochrome-conjugated HBcAg reagents were synthesized and utilized to directly detect ex vivo HBcAg-specific B cells in 36 patients with CHB.

The frequency, phenotype, functional maturation and transcriptomic profile of HBcAg-specific B cells was studied by flow cytometry, in vitro maturation assays and NanoString-based detection of expression of immune genes, which we compared with HBsAg-specific B cells and total B cells.

PARAGRAPH

HBcAg-specific B cells are present at a higher frequency than HBsAg-specific B cells in patients with CHB and, unlike HBsAg-specific B cells, they mature efficiently into antibody-secreting cells in vitro.

Their phenotypic and transcriptomic profiles show that HBcAg-specific B cells are preferentially IgG+ memory B cells.

However, despite their phenotypic and functional differences, HBcAg- and HBsAg-specific B cells from patients with CHB share an mRNA expression pattern that differs from global memory B cells and is characterized by high expression of genes indicative of cross-presentation and innate immune activity.

PARAGRAPH

During chronic HBV infection, a direct relation exists between serological detection of anti-HBs and anti-HBc antibodies, and the quantity and function of their respective specific B cells.

However, the transcriptomic analysis performed in HBsAg- and HBcAg-specific B cells suggests additional roles of HBV-specific B cells beyond the production of antibodies.

