10.1016/j.jhep.2019.10.030

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Early acetaminophen-protein adducts predict hepatotoxicity following overdose (ATOM-5)

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Acetaminophen (APAP), also called paracetamol, is one of the most common medications resulting in hospital presentations and admissions following deliberate self-poisoning and accidental overdose worldwide.1

Its major toxic effect is acute liver injury (ALI) and it is the most common cause of acute liver failure (ALF) in North America, Europe and Australia.2–4

The American Association of Poison Control Centres, which annually provides over 2.1 million tele-consults for the US and associated territories, received over 100,000 calls related to APAP exposure in 2017.5

PARAGRAPH

The mainstay of treatment of APAP poisoning is acetylcysteine.

Indications for treatment are determined by reported dose and time of ingestion, APAP concentration and hepatic aminotransferase values.6,7

This approach has various limitations including the need for an accurate time of exposure measurement following an acute ingestion to be able to plot APAP concentration on the Rumack-Matthew nomogram.

APAP concentrations have a low specificity and low positive predictive value in determining who will develop ALI.

Furthermore, the aminotransferases, utilised as the traditional biomarkers of ALI, can remain within the normal range for up to 24 h post-exposure and are not specific for APAP-induced ALI.4

PARAGRAPH

Acetylcysteine is a highly efficacious treatment and has dramatically decreased the rates of ALI and mortality from APAP overdose.

However, the literature has reported cases of ALI that occurred despite early antidote treatment, particularly in large ingestions, or rarely in patients despite APAP concentrations below the Rumack-Matthew nomogram treatment line.8–11

PARAGRAPH

Hence, there has been increasing interest in novel biomarkers that may be able to stratify patients at presentation based on their risk of liver injury and/or biomarkers that are specific for APAP toxicity.

Novel biomarkers include those that are liver specific (e.g. microRNA-122 [miR-122]), or reflect mechanisms of toxicity, such as the involvement of activated immune cells (e.g. high mobility group box-1 [HMGB1], keratin-18); mitochondrial dysfunction (e.g. glutamate dehydrogenase) or oxidative metabolism (e.g. APAP-protein adducts [APAP-protein adducts]).12–14

PARAGRAPH

APAP is primarily metabolised into non-toxic metabolites, but a small percentage is metabolised via cytochrome P450 to produce the reactive metabolite, N-acetyl-p-benzoquinone imine (NAPQI).15

NAPQI is detoxified by irreversible glutathione-dependent conjugation reactions to mercapturic acid and cysteine conjugates.16

In overdose, the increased formation of NAPQI depletes hepatic glutathione and NAPQI covalently binds to critical cellular proteins.17

It has been hypothesised that covalent binding reduces the activity of critical proteins, although additional mechanisms, such as mitochondrial injury and oxygen and nitrogen stress, have been linked to hepatic cell death.

APAP-protein adducts represent NAPQI covalently bound to cysteine groups on proteins that are released into blood during hepatocyte lysis.18

PARAGRAPH

Previous studies evaluating APAP-protein adducts in clinical samples have examined the utility of this biomarker in patients with severe ALI and ALF following APAP ingestion.

In these studies, APAP-protein adducts ≥1.0 nmol/ml distinguished cases of APAP-related ALF from those due to other causes.19–22

However, there is little data on APAP-protein adduct concentration profiles within the first 24 h following toxic APAP ingestion.

In addition, it is unknown whether APAP-protein adducts may be able to predict ALI earlier than traditional biomarkers.

SECTION

Patients and methods

SECTION

Design and setting

PARAGRAPH

This study was nested within the Australian Toxicology Monitoring (ATOM) Collaboration, which consists of prospective observational studies to investigate various drugs and toxins in overdose.

ATOM is a multicentre collaboration comprising 5 toxicology units in New South Wales (NSW) and Queensland (QLD) Australia and through calls to the NSW and QLD Poisons Information Centres (PIC).

The Australian Paracetamol Project collected clinical data and at least 3 serum samples in the first 24 h of admission at >4 h post-ingestion or the time of admission, 4 h later, and 1–2 h before completion of the 21 h treatment protocol with acetylcysteine.

If available, serum samples collected for patient management were also analysed.

The ATOM study received ethical approval from Human Research and Ethics Committees in NSW that covered all involved institutions and patients provided informed consent for participation in the study.

SECTION

Selection of participants

PARAGRAPH

Patients were recruited from January 2013 until January 2015; there were 2 methods to identify and recruit patients.

Firstly, 2 toxicology units (Prince of Wales and Calvary Mater), recruited all admitted patients aged ≥14 years who were assessed for APAP ingestion regardless of intent (acute or repeated supratherapeutic) or preparation (immediate or modified release).

These units each manage around 1,000 toxicology patients annually.

Secondly, higher-risk patients were recruited through telephone calls to the NSW PIC.

The NSW PIC receives approximately 65,000 calls per year from NSW (population approximately 7.95 million).23,24

Hence, patients aged ≥14 years were identified through the NSW PIC for inclusion if they met any of the following criteria: any acute immediate-release (IR) APAP ingestion of ≥35 g, or any ingestion of modified-release (MR) APAP of ≥10 g or 200 mg/kg (whichever was less) over a period of less than 8 h, or any patients with an alanine aminotransferase (ALT) ≥500 U/L (10x the upper limit of normal) following APAP ingestion (regardless of intent or preparation).

These patients were recruited from over 28 hospitals from around NSW.

SECTION

Methods and measurements

PARAGRAPH

Clinical data were collected on a preformatted clinical datasheet and from medical records.

Data collected included demographic information, overdose exposure (time and dose ingested), co-ingestions including ethanol, laboratory results, treatments, and outcomes.

The ingestion was defined as acute if the ingestion occurred over less than an 8 h period (as per the Australian APAP treatment guidelines).25

All other ingestions were considered to be repeated supratherapeutic ingestion (RSTI).

In Australia, APAP is available as IR and MR formulations.

Each MR APAP tablet contains 665 mg of APAP of which 69% is slow-release and 31% IR APAP in a bilayer tablet.

There were some patients for whom an ALT was not recorded at the completion of acetylcysteine treatment or 24 h post-ingestion for those not requiring acetylcysteine.

These patients were assumed not to have developed hepatotoxicity.

SECTION

Analytical method for APAP-protein adducts

PARAGRAPH

Serum samples were frozen at −80° for batched analysis of APAP-protein adducts using a modification of the previously reported high-performance liquid chromatography-electrochemical detection assay for APAP-protein adducts.21,26

Assay modifications included centrifugal gel filtration, high efficiency proteolytic digestion, and increased sample injection volumes, resulting in improved sensitivity and efficiency of the assay.

Calibration curves were prepared over the concentration range of 0.039 to 20 nmol/ml using drug-free serum spiked with authentic APAP cysteine.

Standard curves were linear with regression coefficients of 0.99.

Samples with concentrations above the highest standard were diluted so their values fell within the range of the standard curve.

Intra- and inter-assay variations were assessed from the quality control samples.

Quality control concentrations ranged from 0.031 to 17.5 nmol/ml, and 3 replicates were analysed with each analysis.

Intra-assay variation ranged from 3.24 to 10.0%.

Inter-assay variation ranged from 5.29 to 10.49%.

The lower limit of quantitation of the assay was determined by the lowest quality control concentration measurable with a coefficient of variability of less than 15%.

The lower limit of quantitation for the assay was defined as 0.03 nmol/ml.

The laboratory technician was blinded to clinical histories and outcomes.

The analysis was performed in the laboratory of Dr. Laura James, located at Arkansas Children’s Research Institute, Little Rock, Arkansas (Supplementary CTAT Table).

SECTION

Outcomes

Clinical outcomes:

SECTION

Pharmacokinetic outcomes:

PARAGRAPH

To compare APAP concentrations between patients at different time points, the APAP ratio was calculated for acute ingestions who had an APAP concentration obtained between 4 and 16 h post-ingestion.

Ratios were not calculated beyond 16 h, consistent with the original publications of the Prescott nomogram.28,29

APAP-aminotransferase multiplication products were calculated as per Sivilotti et al.30 The ALT or aspartate aminotransferase (AST) (in U/L; whichever was greater) and the simultaneously measured serum APAP concentration (in mg/L) were multiplied.

APAP concentrations that were reported as lower than the laboratory limit of detection (range of detection between 1–10 mg/L) were recorded for the multiplication product as half this limit.

If the lower limit of detection was not reported and an APAP concentration was reported as “not detected”, a lower limit of detection of 5 mg/L was used.30,31

Pre-specified previously proposed cut-off points of 1,500 mg/L × U/L (10,000 μmol/L × IU/L)30 and 10,000 mg/L × U/L (66,000 μmol/L × IU/L)31 were utilised.

The APAP-protein adduct concentration, ALT, AST and APAP-aminotransferase multiplication products measured at the same time point to predict hepatotoxicity were compared using receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis.

For acute ingestions, the APAP-protein adduct concentration used was the serum sample collected at the same time as the serum APAP concentration plotted on the nomogram (≥4 h post-ingestion).

For RSTI we used the initial sample.

If these samples were unavailable, the earliest available serum sample was analysed and the ALT and APAP concentration from that same time point were utilised.

For ROC analysis only those patients with an initial ALT ≤1,000 U/L at the time of APAP-protein adduct measurement were included.

A further analysis to predict an ALT >100 U/L was performed with those patients with an initial ALT ≤100 U/L.

For acute ingestions the initial APAP-protein adduct was compared to age, time to initial APAP-protein measurement, dose of APAP ingested and APAP ratio (at the same time point).

The maximum recorded APAP-protein adduct concentration was compared between those patients who did and did not develop hepatotoxicity (defined as an ALT >1,000 U/L).

The initial APAP-protein adduct concentration was compared to the maximum recorded ALT in all patients and the maximum recorded INR where an INR was measured.

Patient's on warfarin were excluded from the INR analysis (n = 4).

SECTION

Statistical analysis

PARAGRAPH

Data are presented as median and range or IQR (non-normally distributed data).

Comparisons between groups were made using the Mann-Whitney U test.

Associations among variables were determined using Spearman's correlations.

The area under the receiver-operating characteristic curve (AUROC) was determined.

We examined the sensitivity, specificity and likelihood ratio of these variables to predict hepatotoxicity.

A p value of <0.05 was considered statistically significant.

All analysis was performed using GraphPad PRISM® software version 8.0.2.

PARAGRAPH

We determined the added value of APAP-protein adducts and APAP ratio to the current standard predictors of hepatotoxicity and coagulopathy risk by examining logistic regression prediction models.

We compared the AUC of the baseline model and the new models using the DeLong method.32

The baseline model comprised ALT and time to initial sampling (also a proxy for time to treatment).

These 2 variables are known to predict hepatotoxicity and are utilised clinically.

Only patients with initial APAP-protein adducts collected on arrival were utilised for this analysis.

For RSTI, the time of initial sampling was arbitrarily set at 24 h.

The APAP ratio has been used in previous observational studies to compare APAP concentrations between patients at different time points.

It is not routinely used in clinical practice so was not included in the baseline model, instead it was tested as a new marker.

To calculate the APAP ratio in those presenting >16 h post-ingestion or following RSTI, the APAP nomogram value was set arbitrarily at the 16 h APAP concentration.

PARAGRAPH

The outcomes examined were hepatotoxicity, INR ≥2 and ≥5.

Patients were only included in each model if they did not have the outcome at the time of initial sampling.

In patients where an INR was not measured the INR was presumed to be <2.0, as all patients who developed ALI had an INR recorded.

Each logistic regression model enables the calculation of the probability of the outcome (risk) for each individual.

The baseline risk prediction model was constructed and then APAP-protein adducts, and APAP ratio were added to the baseline model to form the new models.

The integrated discrimination improvement (IDI) and risk assessment plots were used to assess if APAP-protein adducts had any additional benefit over known risk factors for predicting outcome.33

The IDI is independent of category and considers separately the actual change in calculated risk for each individual.33

An alternative baseline model was constructed with APAP ratio included with ALT and time to initial sampling.

APAP-protein adduct concentration was added to form the new model tested.

All analysis was performed using R 3.5.1 (The R Foundation for Statistical Computing).

PARAGRAPH

For further details regarding the materials used, please refer to the CTAT table.

SECTION

Results

PARAGRAPH

A total of 240 patients (176 from the 2 toxicology units and 64 from NSW PIC [Table S1]) participated in the study and provided 1,009 serum samples for APAP-protein adduct measurement.

In this cohort, 164 (68%) were female with a median age of 27 years (IQR 19–44).

The majority (85%) of patients presented following acute ingestions, distributed as 158 IR APAP, 35 MR APAP and 11 as a combination of both.

Of the acute ingestions 99% ingested the tablets over ≤2 h. Thirty-six (15%) met the criteria for RSTI of whom 24 ingested for therapeutic purposes, 8 were codeine abusers and 4 had staggered acute ingestions over a period of >8 h. Of the RSTI, the majority were IR APAP (n = 30).

Patient demographic data, co-ingestions, treatments and outcomes are shown in Table 1.

PARAGRAPH

Thirty-six (15%) patients developed hepatotoxicity of whom 28 presented following acute ingestions.

A further 28 (12%) patients had a peak ALT between 100 and ≤1,000 U/L of whom 7 presented following RSTI, none of whom developed an INR ≥2.0.

Of the 36 with hepatotoxicity, 8 had an ALT ≤100 U/L on presentation and 11 had an ALT of >1,000 U/L on presentation.

Of those with hepatotoxicity, 25 developed a peak INR ≥2.0 of whom 8 had severe coagulopathy with an INR ≥5.0 and 5 had severe acute kidney injury (AKIN classification stage 3).

There were no deaths but 1 patient who ingested 50 g of APAP required liver transplantation.

PARAGRAPH

There were 57 (24%) patients who did not have an ALT measured more than 24 h post-ingestion; of these, 45 had an initial APAP concentration below the nomogram line (150 mg/L at 4 h) and hence were at low risk for ALI.29

A further 10 were RSTI and had clinical laboratory tests repeated after 8–12 h.

In these patients, acetylcysteine was discontinued if the repeat ALT was stable or lower than the earlier ALT value (as per the Australian guidelines).25

The remaining 2 were acute ingestions treated within 8 h of ingestion who did not have repeat ALT testing.

SECTION

APAP-protein adducts

PARAGRAPH

There were 1,009 samples available for APAP-protein analysis with a median of 3 samples per patient (IQR 2–5, range 1–29).

The APAP-protein profiles of the patients are shown in Fig. 1.

SECTION

Initial APAP-protein adducts

PARAGRAPH

In this cohort, 203 (85%) patients had an initial serum sample available for APAP-protein adduct analysis that was collected at the same time as the APAP concentration utilised to determine need for acetylcysteine (i.e. at least 4 h post-ingestion for acute ingestions).

In the remaining 37 (15%), we utilised the next available serum sample for the initial APAP-protein adduct analysis; these samples were collected at a median time of 5 h (IQR 3–14 h) post the initial acetaminophen sample.

There were 226 (94%) patients with an ALT ≤1,000 U/L at the time of initial APAP-protein adduct measurement.

Median initial APAP-protein adduct concentrations were significantly lower in those who did not develop hepatotoxicity compared to those who did, 0.26 nmol/ml (IQR 0.15–0.41, range 0.02–2.13, n = 204) versus 1.63 nmol/ml (IQR 0.76–2.02, range 0.58–4.93, n = 22) (p <0.0001) respectively (Fig. 2).

Those with established hepatotoxicity at the time of initial APAP-protein adduct measurement had a median initial APAP-protein adduct concentration of 4.58 nmol/ml (IQR 2.13–18.87, range = 1.43–37.2, n = 14), which was significantly higher than those patients with an initial ALT ≤1,000 U/L whether or not they developed hepatotoxicity (p <0.0001) (Fig. 2).

Results were re-analysed in those with an initial ALT ≤1,000 U/L including only the 194 patients who had a serum sample available for APAP-protein adduct analysis that was collected at the same time as the initial APAP concentration.

The results were similar with a median initial APAP-protein adduct concentration of 0.25 nmol/ml (n = 174, IQR 0.14–0.39) versus 1.69 nmol/ml (n = 20, IQR 0.71–2.03) (p <0.0001).

PARAGRAPH

In those patients with an ALT ≤1,000 U/L at presentation, the initial APAP-protein adduct, ALT, AST (all collected from the same time point) and the APAP-multiplication product were compared for their ability to predict hepatotoxicity (Table 2 and Fig. 3).

The initial APAP-protein adduct was superior on AUROC analysis (Fig. 3), compared to initial ALT or AST and APAP-multiplication product (Table 2 and Fig. 3).

Further, an initial APAP-protein adduct concentration of ≥0.58 nmol/ml was both more sensitive and specific than an ALT and AST of >50 U/L and proposed APAP-multiplication product values of ≥1,500 mg/L × U/L (Table 2 and Fig. 3).

The analysis was repeated only with those patients who had an ALT measured at 24 h or more post-ingestion.

For this repeated analysis, the AUROC for initial APAP-protein adducts to predict hepatotoxicity remained 0.98 (95% CI 0.96–1.00; n = 169; p <0.0001).

PARAGRAPH

Next, the negative and positive predictive values for predicting hepatotoxicity were calculated for initial APAP-protein adduct concentration, ALT, AST and the APAP-multiplication product.

As the inclusion criteria varied depending on site of enrolment, results were stratified according to site of recruitment (i.e. either the 2 toxicology units or NSW PIC [high risk patients]) (Table S1).

The 2 toxicology units recruited all APAP poisoning patients, in this cohort, an initial APAP-protein adduct concentration of ≥0.58 nmol/ml had a positive predictive value for hepatotoxicity of 0.48 (95% CI 0.29–0.67) and negative predictive value of 1.00 (95% CI 0.97–1.00) (Table S2).

PARAGRAPH

Seven patients presented with an ALT ≤50 U/L (within the normal reference range) and subsequently went on to develop hepatotoxicity; 6 of the 7 had serum available from presentation for analysis of APAP-protein adducts (Table 3 and Fig. S1).

The median initial APAP-protein adduct value was 0.66 nmol/ml (IQR 0.60–0.76 nmol/ml, range 0.58–1.02 nmol/ml) for this cohort.

PARAGRAPH

There were 18 patients who had an initial APAP-protein adduct ≥0.58 nmol/L who did not develop hepatotoxicity.

Among this subset of patients, 7 presented with RSTI and 4 with MR APAP ingestions.

Of these 18 patients, 7 developed a peak ALT >100 U/L.

PARAGRAPH

The median initial APAP-protein adduct measurement and AUROC were also analysed with an outcome of peak ALT >100 U/L.

There were 198 (83%) patients with an ALT ≤100 U/L at the time of initial APAP-protein adduct measurement.

Those who developed a peak ALT >100 U/L had a higher median initial APAP-protein adduct concentration compared to those who did not, 0.57 nmol/ml (n = 20, IQR 0.44–0.67 nmol/ml) versus 0.25 nmol/ml (n = 178, IQR 0.14–0.36 nmol/ml ) (p <0.0001) (Fig. S2).

Those patients who had an ALT of >100 U/L on presentation had a significant higher median initial APAP-protein adduct concentration of 1.70 nmol/ml (IQR 0.78–2.55; n = 42; p = 0.0001) than the preceding 2 groups (Fig. S2).

Analysis of the AUROC was performed to predict a peak ALT >100 U/L, in those with an initial ALT less than this (Table 2 and Fig. 3).

The initial APAP-protein adduct was superior to initial ALT or AST and APAP-multiplication product on AUROC analysis (Table 2 and Fig. 3).

PARAGRAPH

IDI metrics that quantify the added value of APAP-protein adducts to known risk factors (ALT and time to initial sampling) for the prediction of hepatotoxicity, INR ≥2 and INR ≥5 are shown in Table 4 and Fig. 4.

This was done by adding each individual’s initial APAP-protein adduct concentrations to the baseline model.

Both the initial APAP-protein adducts and the initial APAP ratio improved prediction of hepatotoxicity and INR ≥2 compared with known risk factors of initial ALT and time to presentation/treatment.

APAP-protein adducts substantially improved the baseline model to predict hepatotoxicity and INR ≥2 (AUROC 0.95 vs. 0.88, p <0.01 and increases in the IDI metrics for both outcomes) (Table 4 and Fig. 4A).

Similar improvements to those seen with APAP-adducts were seen when APAP ratio was added to the model (Table 4 and Fig. 4B).

However, when APAP ratio was included in the baseline model, APAP-adducts did not further improve the prediction of hepatotoxicity or coagulopathy (Table 4 and Fig. 4C).

Results were inconclusive for an INR ≥5 (n = 7) but small numbers with this outcome limit interpretation.

PARAGRAPH

Fig. 5 shows the time post-ingestion relationship between ALT and APAP-protein adducts in those that developed hepatotoxicity following an acute ingestion.

The APAP-protein adducts appear to rise earlier and fall faster and the ratio is not constant over time.

PARAGRAPH

For the 204 acute ingestions, initial APAP-protein adduct value was compared with age, time to initial adduct concentration, dose ingested and APAP ratio (Fig. 6: A-D).

There was a moderate correlation with initial APAP-protein adduct concentration and time to initial measurement (Spearman r = 0.57; 95% CI: 0.46–0.66; p <0.0001).

Dose and APAP ratio had a weak correlation (Spearman r = 0.35 [95% CI 0.22–0.47] and 0.39 [95% CI 0.25–0.51]; p <0.0001).

No relationship was noted between age and initial APAP-protein adduct concentration (Spearman r = 0.04; 95% CI −0.10 to 0.18; p = 0.578).

PARAGRAPH

For all patients the initial APAP-protein adduct value was compared with the maximum recorded ALT and INR (Fig. 6E and F); both moderately correlated with initial APAP-protein adduct value, Spearman r = 0.54 (95% CI 0.44–0.63; n = 240; p <0.0001) and Spearman r = 0.49 (95% CI 0.37–0.59; n = 205; p <0.0001) respectively.

SECTION

Cmax APAP-protein adducts

PARAGRAPH

The median maximum recorded APAP-protein adduct concentration was significantly higher in patients who developed hepatotoxicity compared to those who did not (9.20 nmol/ml [IQR 2.67–17.75, range 1.22–43.23, n = 36] vs. 0.35 nmol/ml [IQR 0.22–0.57; range 0.02–2.38; n = 204]; p <0.0001, respectively).

In a subset of patients (n = 131), the peak APAP-protein adduct concentration and time to peak concentration could be determined.

These are shown in Appendix 1 (supplementary information) and confirm the findings of previous studies by showing that those with hepatotoxicity had significantly higher peak APAP-protein adduct concentrations compared to those that did not experience hepatotoxicity, while the peak APAP-protein adduct concentration moderately correlated with peak ALT.20,21

We also observed a moderate correlation between peak INR and peak APAP-protein adducts (Fig. S3), which has not been observed in previous studies.

This is likely explained by differences in liver injury severity in the patients in these studies; our patients presented earlier in the course of toxicity, and generally had less severe liver injury and lower INR values.21,22

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

Elevation of hepatic aminotransferases following APAP overdose is a latent event that may not occur until 24 h to 48 h after the overdose.

There is a need for biomarkers that can detect APAP-related ALI earlier than the delayed increase in aminotransferases.

There is limited published data on early APAP-protein adduct concentrations; our study of 240 patients with APAP overdose found that the initial APAP-protein adduct concentration could predict which patients presenting with a normal or moderately elevated ALT would later develop hepatotoxicity.

APAP-protein adducts were superior to traditional biomarkers of ALT and AST and APAP-multiplication products.

PARAGRAPH

Several previous studies reported APAP-protein adduct concentrations in patients following acute ingestion of APAP.19,20,34,35

These studies found that APAP-protein adducts were detectable following APAP overdose not resulting in ALI, but in significantly lower concentrations than those who developed ALI.20,34

Adduct concentrations have also been shown to strongly correlate with ALT concentrations.35

However, these studies did not examine the utility of early (on presentation) measurement of APAP-protein adducts to identify patients at high risk of subsequently developing hepatotoxicity.

PARAGRAPH

The need for treatment in those presenting within 8 h of ingestion is generally determined by a timed APAP concentration plotted on the nomogram.

The APAP concentration alone does not reflect the contribution of the hepatic metabolism to toxicity.

Although the Prescott treatment algorithm is safe to use in most patients, the literature suggests that a very small percentage of patients develop hepatotoxicity despite an APAP concentration below the nomogram.8,9

Furthermore, some patients with a high initial APAP concentration are at increased risk of ALI despite acetylcysteine treatment within 8 h of ingestion.9–11

However, it is difficult to predict which patients will develop ALI.

APAP-protein adducts reflect both hepatic glutathione depletion and the metabolic activation of APAP through cytochrome P450 oxidation.16,36

Six patients in the present study developed hepatotoxicity despite an ALT ≤50 U/L on presentation.

Of interest, Patient B required a liver transplant despite antidote treatment at 2.5 h and Patient E developed ALF after ingesting 10 g of acetaminophen with an APAP concentration below the nomogram line (Table 3 and Fig. S1).

Patient E was not initially treated with acetylcysteine (as per local guidelines) and her time of ingestion was thought to be accurate.

Both patients were otherwise well and on no medications.

They both had an initial APAP-protein adduct concentration ≥0.58 nmol/L, higher than most other patients without hepatotoxicity on presentation (Fig. 1).

This finding may indicate that these patients had hepatic glutathione depletion or increased NAPQI production.

We found only a weak correlation between the initial APAP-protein adduct concentration and APAP dose ingested or the APAP ratio in patients with acute overdose.

This finding suggests that APAP-protein adducts may be a measure of early hepatic glutathione depletion.

PARAGRAPH

Previous studies have shown that APAP-protein adducts are sensitive and specific for identifying APAP hepatotoxicity and ALF in patients arriving at tertiary care medical centres late in the course of the toxicity.

Serum APAP concentrations are often low or undetectable in the later stages of toxicity.

A previous study characterising APAP-protein adduct levels in APAP-related ALF reported a median Tmax value for adducts of approximately 72 h after the toxic ingestion.20,21

In addition, an APAP-protein adduct concentration ≥1.1 nmol/ml had a sensitivity of 97% and a specificity of 95% in patients with APAP-related ALF.

Additional studies used an adduct cut-off point of 1.0 nmol/ml for adducts associated with APAP liver injury, defined as an ALT value >1,000 U/L.22,37

The current study demonstrated that those with hepatotoxicity on presentation all had APAP-protein adduct concentrations ≥1.0 nmol/L with many far exceeding this value.

PARAGRAPH

Although the APAP-protein adduct assay is not widely available, the current study suggests a role for this biomarker that is distinct from earlier reports.

The initial APAP-protein adduct concentration improved prediction of hepatotoxicity and coagulopathy even when used in addition to the initial ALT and time (Fig. 4 and Table 4).

The APAP ratio also similarly increased prediction of hepatotoxicity and coagulopathy and is a simple measurement that could be easily utilised in clinical practice (Fig. 4 and Table 4).

However, APAP ratio can only accurately be determined in acute ingestions with a recorded time of ingestion.

Hence, an initial APAP-protein adduct concentration could be utilised to risk stratify patients, even if the time, dose ingested, or intent was unknown.

In particular, the adduct biomarker may be useful in patients where the nomogram or APAP ratio cannot be utilised such as RSTI.

An initial APAP-protein adduct concentration ≥0.58 nmol/L was sensitive in predicting which patients were at risk of hepatotoxicity, prior to a rise in the traditional aminotransferases.

APAP-protein adducts may help guide future management, by i) identifying which patients may benefit from treatment despite an APAP concentration below the nomogram line, ii) guiding acetylcysteine dose and/or duration in patients with large overdoses, or iii) identifying the need for treatment in cases of RSTI.

PARAGRAPH

Furthermore, the high negative predictive value and sensitivity of APAP-protein adducts mean they could be used to identify very low risk patients who still currently receive treatment with acetylcysteine.

For example, in the United Kingdom the threshold for acute APAP overdose is lower than in most other countries (dose >75 mg/kg/day or level above nomogram line set at 100 mg/L at 4 h [not 150 mg/L]).

This greatly increases the number of patients treated with acetylcysteine.

An estimated 31,000 additional patients are treated per death from hepatotoxicity prevented.38

Among these patients who are already low risk, a low initial APAP-protein adduct concentration may be able to identify very low risk patients who do not require treatment.

However, future prospective studies utilising a treatment algorithm that incorporates currently available tests and APAP-protein adducts are needed to confirm our findings and to test these potential applications.

PARAGRAPH

Two prospective cohort studies of APAP overdose have shown that biomarkers such as miR-122, HMGB1, and full-length keratin 18 at hospital presentation can predict ALI (ALT >100 U/L) better than ALT alone.14

In particular, miR-122 had higher hepatic specificity over current biomarkers14,39 and HMGB1 predicted a subsequent INR of >1.5.14

In contrast APAP-protein adduct concentration is a specific biomarker of APAP toxicity that measures the quantity of toxic metabolite bound to cellular protein.

Hence it may give an indication that NAPQI production exceeds hepatic glutathione detoxification capacity.

PARAGRAPH

Limitations of this study include its reliance on patient reporting of APAP timing and dose.

However, generally these aspects of clinical history are carefully recorded as they drive treatment decisions.

Secondly, the number of patients with hepatotoxicity was low, particularly those with an initial ALT <50 U/L who went on to develop ALI.

More patients are required to validate our findings and confirm the best early cut-off to predict hepatotoxicity.

Similarly, larger datasets of RSTI and MR ingestions are required to confirm our results in these patient groups.

Many patients in this study with an initial non-toxic APAP concentration did not have a repeat ALT at 24 h. Although uncommon, some patients may have developed ALI.

SECTION

Conclusion

PARAGRAPH

This study demonstrates that APAP-protein adducts could be utilised as an early biomarker to predict hepatotoxicity following an APAP overdose.

The initial APAP-protein adduct concentration can be used regardless of the dose, preparation, intent or time of ingestion.

APAP-protein adducts may be useful in the future to determine which patients require alteration to the usual treatment algorithms.

SECTION

Abbreviations

PARAGRAPH

ALI, acute liver injury; ALT, alanine aminotransferase; APAP, acetaminophen; AST, aspartate aminotransferase; ATOM, Australian Toxicology Monitoring; AUROC, area under the ROC curve; HMGB1, high mobility group box-1; IDI, integrated discrimination improvement; IR, immediate release; miR-122, microRNA-122; MR, modified release; NAPQI, N-acetyl-p-benzoquinone imine; PIC, Poisons Information Centre; RSTI, repeated supratherapeutic ingestion; ROC, receiver-operating characteristic.

SECTION

Financial support

PARAGRAPH

This research was partially supported by an NHMRC Program Grant 1055176.

Laura James is the Principal Investigator of a Small Business Technology Transfer Award (R42DK079387) from the National Institutes of Diabetes, Digestive, and Kidney Diseases of the United States.

Geoff Isbister is funded by an NHMRC Senior Research Fellowship ID1061041.

SECTION

Conflict of interest

PARAGRAPH

Dr. James is part owner of Acetaminophen Toxicity Diagnostics (ATD), LLC and holds a patent for a lateral flow assay to measure acetaminophen-protein adducts in blood.

The remaining authors declare: no support from any organization for the submitted work; no financial relationships with any organizations that might have an interest in the submitted work in the previous 3 years; no other relationships or activities that could appear to have influenced the submitted work.

PARAGRAPH

Please refer to the accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.

SECTION

Authors' contributions

PARAGRAPH

AC, NB, GI: were involved in the design, data collection and analysis and drafting the manuscript.

KM, BC: were involved in data collection and drafting the manuscript.

LJ: performed the assay and was involved in drafting the manuscript.

JP: performed the integrated discrimination improvement and risk assessment plots and was involved in drafting the manuscript.