10.1016/j.jasrep.2018.10.028

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Registering and documenting the stratification of disruptions and restorations in historical edifices. The contribution of archaeoseismology in architecture

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

In a vast, heterogenous and averagely seismic landscape like the Italian one, characterized by a significant presence of historical edifices that require safeguarding, the recent issuing by the MiBAC of the “Linee Guida per la valutazione e riduzione del rischio sismico del patrimonio culturale allineate alle nuove Norme tecniche per le costruzioni (d.m. 14 gennaio 2008) (Mibac, 2011)” has attempted to regulate interventions in the field of architecture (Pugi and Galassi, 2013; Paradiso et al., 2014a).

This paper specifically outlines the need of a multidisciplinary approach towards the study of past monuments, achieved from the interaction of analyses conducted by different disciplines related to the fields of the sciences and the humanities.

In this panorama, the systematic use of archaeoseismic research applied to historical buildings in broad territorial districts (Arrighetti, 2015, 2016) has produced new groundbreaking data obtained through archaeological methods and tools that are in themselves perfectly integrable with data provided by other disciplines (e.g. historical seismology, structural engineering, earth sciences, restoration, etc.).

In a preliminary stage of investigation, the operational praxis developed for the analysis of such contexts has considered that specific attention should be given to the study of seismologic databases and seismic maps.

This is followed, in the operational phase, by the integration of archaeological data and macro-features reading (Doglioni et al., 1994; Doglioni, 2003; Doglioni and Mazzotti, 2007) along with the documented evidence and analysis of disruptions and restorations, consequently leading to a stratigraphic “breakdown” and interpretation of the constructive history and mechanics of the buildings.

SECTION

Research aim

PARAGRAPH

The present contribution will outline a methodological program designed with the purpose of offering an innovative and multidisciplinary analysis of historical architecture in areas at seismic risk.

The chance to employ readily available technologies for documental survey through point clouds, in order to perform accurate three-dimensional architectural registrations, offers the opportunity to characterize and document certain typologies of disruption, as well as monitoring the structural issues that feature on the edifices themselves.

When this data is integrated with the large amount of information provided by archaeoseismic readings a process is triggered that leads to a more in-depth knowledge of the mechanic, constructive and seismic history of the edifice.

The real objective is therefore not only to offer a periodization, and consequently a structural analysis, of the construction and destruction phases that feature in the edifices, but also to combine these results in order to offer a characterized periodization of both past and ongoing disruptions in the edifice thus linking this data to the historical and seismologic documentation of a specific area.

The historical center of Florence and, specifically, the church of San Remigio, has been chosen as a case study to illustrate the aforementioned methodology.

SECTION

Theory and methods

PARAGRAPH

Archaeoseismology, namely the complex of archaeological analyses applied to the study of contexts located in areas at seismic risk, is a discipline that has seen a wide use over the past decades in different geographical areas of the world.

The reasons for such widespread diffusion are multiple, the most important being the possibility of elaborating data from archaeological research in order to garner evidence of past earthquakes, a class of information unlikely obtainable from any other type of analysis (e.g. the direction of a fault-line, epicenters of historical earthquakes, seismic micro-zoning, etc.) (Guidoboni and Ebel, 2009; Ruggieri et al., 2018).

Although the application of archaeoseismology to fieldwork operations is today widely diffused, both at national and international levels, the use of methods borrowed from the archaeology of architecture and applied to historical edifices in Italian contexts at seismic risk are, to this day, a geographically limited and heterogeneously treated field (Brogiolo, 2008; Doglioni and Squassina, 2011; Karcz and Kafri, 1978; Parenti et al., 2010; Redi et al., 2012; Rideaud and Levret, 2000; Santoro Bianchi, 1996).

From a seismologic point of view the archaeology of historical edifices has dealt sporadically with the analysis of single edifices, with projects aimed rather at the reconstruction of the seismic history of the structure for preventive purposes (Brogiolo, 2008; Brogiolo and Faccio, 2010; Cagnoni, 1996; Doglioni, 1997, 2008; Faccio et al., 1997; Guccione et al., 1998; Lagomarsino and Boato, 2011).

More often than not the seismic event was used to chronologically date and interpret certain construction phases and/or stratigraphic interfaces (Cámara, 2010; Vanni Desideri, 2001).

Even more rare are forms of archaeoseismic experiments conducted with the aim of analyzing local architecture.

PARAGRAPH

The use of archaeoseismic analysis applied to an historical center might be considered as an operation akin to a form of Light Archaeology1 specialization employed on an urban scale; this has proven to be extremely efficient at providing qualitative and quantitative data on past seismic activities and their effect on architectural heritage, visible in the changes that occurred both in the urban fabric and in single architectural complexes over the course of time.

In general, after an initial stage of bibliographic research, through the following Operational Stages (OS), an archaeoseismic project would focus on the analysis of the study context (OS1, OS2, OS3) and on the specific edifice (OS4, OS5, OS6, OS7):

analysis of historical documentation of the context

survey of the examined area

identification of representative samples

analysis of historical documentation of the representative samples

survey of the structures of potential interest

PARAGRAPH

In short, the analysis of the historical sources of the context of study (OS1) allows one to outline a first area on which to conduct survey work (OS2), identifying edifices that are more likely to show the effects of historical earthquakes in a historical center over the course of time (OS3).

Together with an analysis of historical sources relative to these specific buildings (OS4), accurate survey (OS5) must be conducted by way of laser scanner and Structure from Motion technologies in order to obtain ortho-surfaces on which to register the archaeological readings along with the material and structural deteriorations (OS6).

As to the disruptions, it is of fundamental importance to dispose of reliable 3D metric surveys (Arrighetti et al., 2016) that allow to accurately register and document structural deformations through the elaboration of Elevation Maps2 (Fig. 1).

Following the stratigraphic analysis and characterization of the cracking pattern of the buildings internal and external masonry, a number of survey campaigns must be conducted in order to provide an overall model of the architectures, as well as offering precise details on edifice portions considered of interest.

The model of the whole architectural complex would allow to relate different parts of the structure (Galassi et al., 2017, 2018a; Paradiso et al., 2014b) – particularly the volumes, room floorings and visible architectural elements (i.e. windows, portals, etc.) – detecting both inconsistencies and similarities with what emerges from the preliminary examination of the wall surfaces.

Furthermore, the cloud points obtained from the laser scanner constitute a particularly explicative and useful base for data registration and interpretation; this is achieved through the production, when necessary, of elevations and sections, and the detailed analysis of areas considered of major interest.

An example of this practice, is the characterization of the deformations that can be obtained from the analysis of both the interior and the exterior wall structures, allowing in some cases to comprehend the extent of the shifts that took place, as well as the relation between the identified portions and the complexity of the structure as a whole.

Finally, by relating this data with the stratigraphic reading a series of relative chronologies can be hypothesized for certain collapse mechanisms (Galassi and Paradiso, 2014; Galassi et al., 2018b, 2018c, 2018d), offering also invaluable interpretative insights on the reasons behind the formation of such problems (OS7).

PARAGRAPH

Therefore, the analyses that are being conducted in the historical center of the city of Florence, of which the Church of San Remigio represents the first case study to be presented, will become practical examples to illustrate in further detail what has just been discussed; in this case the wall-surface reading of the building, integrated with the characterization of the disruptions and the instrumental survey, has permitted to identify and chronologically locate past damages and restoration works related to the first construction phase of the edifice, the origin of which appears to feature a number of different interpretations.

SECTION

Experimenting methodology: the project “Archaeoseismology and earthquakes in Florence”33The work was conducted at the SAGAS Department of the University of Florence in collaboration with Professor Guido Vannini with whom methods, contents and results were shared. The project, under the scientific direction of the author, refers to the awarding of the public tender “Giovani Ricercatori Protagonisti” for 8 type a) research grants lasting two years and financed by the Foundation “Ente Cassa di Risparmio di Firenze” – Research topic: Cultural Heritage: restoration, dating, accessibility.

PARAGRAPH

The historical center of Florence is currently the focus of a two-year project, financed by the Ente Cassa di Risparmio following the awarding of a public tender.

The research, aimed at tracing the effects of the earthquake that struck the city of Florence in 1453, offers the possibility to consider different methodological aspects in regards to the employment of survey technologies through point clouds; this has been integrated with the archaeoseismic analysis of edifices in order to register, document and interpret past damages that feature on the material structure of buildings.

The Seismologic databases elaborated by the Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia (INGV), of which we can cite the most recent edition, namely: The Parametric Catalogue of Italian Earthquakes of 2015 (Camassi et al., 2011; Locati et al., 2016; Rovida et al., 2016), illustrate for the city a seismic history characterized by 229 events taking place between the year 1000 CE and 2008 (Fig. 2).

Among the numerous events that constitute the seismic history of Florence, three strong earthquakes can be identified whose epicentral area corresponds to the city or its surroundings: 28 of September 1453, 28 of November 1554 and 18 of May 1895 (Cioppi, 1995).

SECTION

The church of San Remigio

PARAGRAPH

The church of San Remigio (Fig. 3) is located in the historical center of Florence.

The edifice is built in stone, for the most part Pietraforte, with a Romanesque-style exterior and Gothic interior; the latter is characterized by a three-nave structure divided by pillars surmounted by a ribbed-vaulted ceiling with finely frescoed pointed arches (Fig. 4).

The back portion features a central chapel with two smaller side chapels.

On the exterior the walls are exposed and are characterized by a clearly visible stratification of constructive and destructive events, evident on three of the four external sides of the church and on the north side of the bell tower.

The interior is completely plastered and consequently impossible to read stratigraphically.

The bell tower, built in stone and presenting a square structure, is located in the back portion of the church and features evident brickwork reconstruction in the topmost portion of the belfry.

PARAGRAPH

The church, from a stratigraphic-constructive point of view, represents one of the oldest and best-preserved edifices in the historical center of Florence.

For these characteristics the building has been chosen as the starting point of a wide-ranging multidisciplinary project aimed at the analysis of the entire urban center.

SECTION

Analysis of the historical sources (OS4)

PARAGRAPH

The church of San Remigio is situated in the district of Santa Croce, in the historical center of Florence.

It is one of the twelve oldest churches in the city, probably built during the Carolingian period.

As noted by Rosselli,4 in the place where the church now stands, there was the hospital of San Romeo,5 a center that housed French pilgrims passing through Florence on their way to Rome.

The first document that testifies the foundation of the church of San Remigio is an ancient paper dating back to 1040 and kept at the Santa Felicita Archive, in which the property donated by Roland, a Florentine Canon,6 is cited; the sacred building was here listed and donated to nuns who owned it until 1265, a donation that was also confirmed by the Bishop Rinieri (Ughelli, 1648, p. 75).

The existence of a river stoppage point is attested near the church of San Remigio in the 11th century, offering tangible proof that one of the river banks of the Arno was located in a different position from the present; various authors have also theorized the presence in the same area of a port during the Roman period (Scampoli, 2010, p. 18).

The church underwent a number of changes over the course of the centuries; the first Romanesque structure comprised of three naves divided by two rows of four pillars was discovered during the most recent restoration works that took place after the flooding of Florence in 1966 (Fig. 5).

Little can presently be seen of the Romanesque structure since the building was heavily remodeled during the Gothic period.

The whole church was completely renovated in order to house a larger number of worshippers, arriving to this day in more or less the present form, although minor interventions were carried out over time.

There is no certain evidence on the precise dates in which the Gothic restructuring took place, although it is hypothesized that this occurred at some time between the end of the 13th and the third decade of the 15th century.7

The most widely acknowledged hypothesis is the one by the historian Stefano Rosselli, who assumes that the reconstruction took place in the second half of the 14th century, on the basis that on the first right-side pillar and on the keystone of the first vault of the nave a symbol of the Pepi family is represented along with the inscription “Sepolcrum Piero del Bene Pepi et filiorum”.

Piero del Bene Pepi was prior in the year 1350, signifying that the construction of the church must have begun at least before his death, or in the decades during which he was prior (Richa, 1754, p. 257).

Other works were conducted during the Renaissance, although on a modest scale, possibly due to the scarcity of available funds.

In the 20th century the building was damaged by the flood that devastated Florence in the month of November 1966.8

The church of San Remigio was one of the buildings worst damaged by the calamity; the water, flooding the inside of the church, reached a height of five meters, submerging the paintings and all the furnishings of value that were later transferred to another location for restoration.

In the days following the flood the church also underwent restoration works conducted by the Superintendence.

Restoration work was made necessary not only by the damage caused by the water, but also because of structural problems connected to the instability of the Gothic roofing, which featured already from quite some time traces of lesions and disruptions.

The restoration project included the church, the bell tower, the sacristy and the cellars.

SECTION

Survey (OS5) and archaeoseismic analysis (OS6)

PARAGRAPH

Parallelly to the historical research (OS4) a series of archaeological analyses were conducted on the material structure of the edifice (OS6), following a methodological protocol elaborated over the years in the Archaeology of Architecture discipline (Brogiolo and Cagnana, 2012).

The work was aimed at identifying and periodizing the constructive and destructive actions that involved the church during its history.

Therefore, from a stratigraphic point of view, the bell tower appears to have been built (probably with another function, most likely housing) in a period preceding the back portion of the church (Fig. 6, Phase I); this last is in fact set against the cantonal of the tower and features a number of small cuts carried out in order to join the two structures.

The stratigraphic reading conducted on the church revealed the presence of five well distinguishable construction phases (Fig. 6).

A fully Romanesque-style first period is visible in some portions of the structure characterized by narrow single-lancet windows, with a wall surface mostly in scalpel-worked blocks of sandstone (Fig. 6, Phase II).

The traces of this construction phase are visible in the areas adjacent to the north-western cantonal, in the lower portion to the east of the façade and in the internal portions of the structure up to a height of about three meters.

This phase are followed by intense restructuring activities operated around the mid-14th century in order to convert the Romanesque building into one of the most important examples of Florentine Gothic architecture (Fig. 6, Phase III).

The major stratigraphic traces of this work can be seen in the razing of the Romanesque structure and its successive raising, operations that are clearly visible in both side elevations.

Further remodeling was also conducted in this period on the façade and on the apse in order to harmoniously adapt them with the rest of the structure.

The third phase is really important from a seismological point of view because it was set after a clearly visible disruption in the collapse interface coinciding to the point where phases II and III meet.

A structure misalignment is in fact visible in this point with an evident reconstruction of the wall face (Fig. 8).

The fourth phase, dating back to the Renaissance period, is characterized by a limited number of activities that do not affect the structural layout of the church (Fig. 6, Phase IV); a widening of the windows can be registered in the western side elevation (Fig. 7b), accompanied by the opening of new windows in the façade and the apsis wall (Fig. 3).

The last two phases features works conducted in the 20th century (Fig. 7a), some of these following the damages caused by the flooding of Florence (Fig. 6, Phase V and VI).

From a structural perspective the stratified traces of disruptions accumulated in the edifice over the course of time are evident (OS5).

The edifice in fact features extensive deformations centered mainly in the bell tower (the upper portion is not in axis), the church façade (bulging is clearly visible and localized at the height of the main window) and along the western side prospect.

In this last case two different kinds of deformations can be recognized, characterized by a quite evident stratification (Fig. 8).

By connecting the archaeological interpretation to the analysis of the disruptions it is possible to assume that after a first deformation (possibly due to rapidly occurring compression damage that caused the presence of a lesion in the central portion of the bulging, the latter visible in both the inner and outer wall prospect) that took place during the second construction phase, corresponding to the Romanesque period, another extensive deformation occurred in the upper and central portion of the prospect, accompanied by a generalized and significant cracking pattern (Fig. 9) that began in the Gothic period (Fig. 6, Phase III) and is still ongoing (the lesions encompass wall surfaces and architectonic elements set during the third phase and reaching up to the fifth, Fig. 10a).

Although the causes and mechanics of this second damage are easily interpretable and, quite assuredly, attributable to the pressure of the inner vaults on the structure built in the third phase, less clear instead are the causes that led to the rapid and traumatic deformation as well as the structure lesion in the second construction phase and therefore before the first half of the 14th century (Fig. 10b).

The type of damage, related to damage mechanisms typical of single hall churches,9 and the location, exactly in line with the Romanesque pillars (presently replaced by the Gothic ones) on which the roof beams rested originally (Fig. 5), has allowed to exclude the presence of issues connected to the failure of the foundations or structural problems but rather to reasonably consider a seismic origin for the identified damages.

In accord with what is reported in the seismic databases elaborated by the Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia, of which we can cite the last edition in chronological order, specifically the DataBase Macrosismico Italiano – DBMI15 (Locati et al., 2016; Rovida et al., 2016), the event that involved this structure might be the one that took place either in 1325 or 1345.

SECTION

Conclusion

PARAGRAPH

Archaeoseismology provides the opportunity to retrace the architectural development of single edifices, reconstructing their “seismic history” – intended as the complex of different construction/destruction phenomena closely related to historical earthquakes that took place in the area and that affected the edifices structurally – and successively connecting it to the entire study context.

In addition, the identification and characterization of disruptions, repair work or reconstructions, integrated with the stratigraphic analysis of the edifices, provides valuable information on the relative and absolute chronologies of such events.

Furthermore, once the traces of collapse and restoration are proved as evidence of past earthquakes (unless caused by other natural and/or anthropic factors), it is in some cases possible to suggest both the presence and intensity of catastrophic events still unknown to other documental sources – such as the seismic catalogues – and to have a better understanding of how an edifice reacted to a specific earthquake.

The possibility to precisely characterize single disruptions and chronologically locate them by way of stratigraphic analysis and historical sources offers an in-depth knowledge of the buildings fabric as well as their constructive and mechanic history.

This information is of fundamental importance for vulnerability assessments and the planning of restoration and strengthening works (Paradiso et al., 2013; Sinicropi et al., 2014; Galassi, 2018a, 2018b).

It is therefore important to understand which multidisciplinary methods and techniques must absolutely co-exist and work in synergy, and more importantly, be directed by trained personnel with the required skills and competencies.

Only through the ability to employ the necessary technologies and methods at a high level is it possible to answer both historical and technical questions while justifying more wide-ranging reflections.

PARAGRAPH

It is clearly evident that the application of the archaeoseismic method on the church of San Remigio demonstrates the enormous potential offered by the use of the analysis applied to an edifice, even more so when integrated with an accurate and complete instrumental survey aimed at registering, identifying and chronologically positioning the disruption that occurred over time.

Through an archaeoseismic reinterpretation of edited material, the research project has produced detailed and innovative documentation, providing a more in-depth knowledge of the history of the church of San Remigio and, in perspective, of the city of Florence, specifically on the period between 12th and 13th centuries, possibly interested by seismic activity.

The successive stage in the research will be to integrate the data from the analysis of the church of San Remigio with information obtained from other religious structures in the historical center of Florence.

The combination of results from a range of case studies will permit to fully comprehend the potentials offered by an archaeoseismology project aimed at architectures in an urban environment.

A method of investigation that might be exported at both a national and international scale for the preservation and safeguard of buildings as well as historical centers from future natural events.

SECTION

Aknowledgments

PARAGRAPH

Survey and analysis of the church of San Remigio was coordinated by the author with the collaboration of architects Marco Repole and Federica Pizzimenti (Department of Architecture – University of Florence) for the survey work and architectural rendering, and of Professor Giovanni Minutoli (Department of Architecture – University of Florence) for the structural and diagnostic analysis.

Full article translation from Italian to English by Dr. Alexander Agostini.