10.1016/j.jhep.2019.07.019

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Integrin β1-enriched extracellular vesicles mediate monocyte adhesion and promote liver inflammation in murine NASH

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

With the worldwide increase in obesity, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is currently the most common chronic liver disease.1

A subset of patients with NAFLD develop a more severe inflammatory form termed non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) which can progress to end-stage liver disease.

NASH is currently the leading cause of liver-related mortality in many western countries.2

Therefore, there is an unmet need for mechanism-based therapeutic strategies that reverse established NASH and control the progression of the disease.

PARAGRAPH

Current concepts suggest that excess circulating free fatty acids mediate hepatocyte lipotoxicity in NASH.3

Moreover, patients with NASH are at risk of end-stage liver disease, mainly secondary to the unrelenting sterile inflammatory response triggered by hepatocyte lipotoxicity.

This inflammatory response is mediated, in part, by the recruited monocytes that differentiate into macrophages, so-called monocyte-derived macrophages (MoMFs).4

Although targeting monocyte infiltration in NASH via the dual CC chemokine receptor types 2 and 5 (CCR2/5) antagonist improved fibrosis, it was insufficient to resolve human steatohepatitis.5

Therefore, key additional signals regulating the trafficking and retention of circulating monocytes in the NASH liver remain undefined.

PARAGRAPH

Hepatocytes release diverse types of membrane-bound, nanometer-sized extracellular vesicles (EVs) into the extracellular milieu under physiological conditions.

EVs are efficient messengers, with superior stability and bioavailability of their signature cargos implicated in inflammatory responses.6–8

Interestingly, many of the EV cargos are selectively transferred through intracellular trafficking pathways and packaged into EVs, reflecting the pathophysiological context of the parent cell.9

EVs released from lipotoxic hepatocytes are involved in MoMF chemotaxis and the hepatic inflammatory response,6–8 however, the role of lipotoxic hepatocyte-derived EVs (lipotoxic EVs) in promoting circulating monocyte liver-specific homing through regulating their adhesion to liver sinusoidal endothelial cells (LSECs) in the NASH liver microenvironment has not been explored.

PARAGRAPH

LSECs are highly specialized endothelial cells that serve as a platform for various immune cells, including monocytes, to lodge in the liver.10

As monocyte receptor-LSEC ligand interactions are not unique to the liver, the question remains whether hepatocyte-specific recruitment processes via EVs exists in NASH.

A single prior study reported that adoptive transfer of EVs isolated from the serum of high fat diet-fed mice into chow-fed mice resulted in myeloid cell activation and accumulation in the liver.11

However, the mechanism by which EVs mediate the hepatic accumulation of myeloid cells was not explored.

PARAGRAPH

Integrins (ITGs) provide the central mechanism for cells in multicellular organisms to interact with and sense their extracellular environment.12

Integrins are heterodimeric cell surface transmembrane proteins consisting of 24 non-covalently associated α and β subunits which mediate cell-cell and cell-matrix interaction.13

ITGα9 and β1 exist as heterodimers, and our data indicate that they are particularly enriched in EVs derived from lipotoxic hepatocytes; hence we will use ITGβ1 for simplicity in this manuscript to refer to ITGα9β1.

Vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 (VCAM-1) is expressed on the surface of LSECs and is a known ligand for ITGα9β1.14

Interestingly, ITG can adopt a closed conformation that has a low affinity for ligand (inactive) or an extended open conformation that has a high affinity for ligand (active).15

Binding of intracellular proteins such as Talin to the dephosphorylated cytoplasmic tail of ITGβ1 regulates its activation and promotes ligand binding.15

Kinase p38 has been implicated in ITGβ activation via an inside-out, ligand-independent signaling in different disease models.16,17

We have previously demonstrated that lipotoxic treatment in hepatocytes induces a mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling cascade leading to the activated phosphorylation of p38.6,18,19

Moreover, ITGs undergo constant endocytic trafficking and recycling that regulate ITG-mediated cell adhesion and migration.20,21

This process of ITG trafficking suggests that in lipotoxic hepatocytes, ITGβ1 traffics through the endocytic-multivesicular body (MVB) pathway to be released in EVs.

PARAGRAPH

Herein we report that ITGβ1, a highly expressed ITG in hepatocytes,22 is enriched and in an active status in lipotoxic EVs.

ITGβ1-enriched EVs enhance monocyte adhesion to LSECs.

Most importantly, we demonstrate that ITGβ1 neutralizing antibody attenuates diet-induced NASH in mice, mainly by reducing proinflammatory monocyte hepatic infiltration.

SECTION

Materials and methods

SECTION

Nanoscale flow cytometry

PARAGRAPH

EVs derived from cell culture medium or human serum were labelled with the active conformation sensitive ITGβ1 antibody 9EG7 and analyzed using the A50-Micro Plus nanoscale flow cytometry (Apogee FlowSystems Inc.).

SECTION

Adhesion assay

PARAGRAPH

A flow-based shear stress adhesion assay consisting of a microfluidic chamber, syringe pump and inverted phase microscope was employed to assess adhesion of monocytes to LSECs.

Liver sinusoidal endothelial cells were seeded in the chamber channel.

Monocytes were incubated overnight with EVs, infused through the chamber at a constant shear stress of 0.01 Pa for 5 min.

Adherent monocytes were imaged and quantified using ImageJ software.

SECTION

Animals

PARAGRAPH

Study protocols were conducted as approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of Mayo Clinic.

C57BL/6J male mice were purchased from Jackson Laboratory.

Eight-week-old mice were fed either a chow diet or a diet rich in fat, fructose, and cholesterol (FFC) (AIN-76A Western Diet, TestDiet, St Louis, MO) for 24 weeks.

At 20 weeks on the diet, mice were randomized to receive either anti-ITGβ1 neutralization antibody (Hmb1-1) or IgG isotype antibody at a dose of 1 μg/g body weight intraperitoneally, twice per week for 4 weeks.

Intrahepatic mouse leukocytes were isolated using liver dissociation kit and Percoll gradient centrifugation and subjected to flow cytometry and mass cytometry by time-of-flight (CyTOF) analysis.

PARAGRAPH

Full details of the materials and methods are included in the supplementary information.

SECTION

Results

SECTION

Lipotoxic hepatocyte-derived EVs are enriched with integrins

PARAGRAPH

We adopted a non-biased approach to identify and characterize the key proteins on lipotoxic hepatocyte-derived EVs.

To this end, we performed proteomics analysis by mass spectrometry (MS) on the EVs derived from primary mouse hepatocytes (PMHs) treated with vehicle (Veh) and the toxic lipid mediator lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC).

We employed LPC since the toxicity of the saturated free fatty acid palmitate is dependent upon its metabolism to LPC.23,24

Unbiased Ingenuity® pathway analysis (IPA) of the proteomics data identified ITG signaling among the top represented canonical pathways, particularly in EVs from LPC-treated hepatocytes when compared to EVs from vehicle-treated hepatocytes (Fig. 1A).

Next, we performed immunoblot analysis for different ITGs in hepatocytes treated with vehicle and LPC, and their derived EVs.

Western blot identified selective enrichment of ITGβ1, ITGα5, ITGα9, and ITGαv in EVs released from lipotoxic PMH, without changes at the cellular levels (Fig. 1B).

Similar results were obtained with the human hepatoma cell line Huh7 (Fig. 1C).

Since ITGβ1 is the most abundant ITG on hepatocytes22 and the only ITGβ expressed on EVs based on our MS data, we focused on ITGβ1 as the key functional ITG family member on lipotoxic EVs.

Interestingly, the protein level of Talin-1 (a versatile ITGβ1 affinity regulator implicated in adhesion)25 was also increased in lipotoxic EVs, suggesting that the ITGβ1 on lipotoxic EVs is in active conformation status.

To confirm this observation, we employed immunogold electron microscopy, and demonstrated using the active conformation sensitive ITGβ1 antibody (9EG7) enrichment of ITGβ1 in EVs released from lipotoxic PMH (Fig. 1D).

This observation was further confirmed by nanoscale flow cytometry, which allows the quantification of active ITGβ1-bearing EVs.

LPC-treated PMH released more abundant active ITGβ1-positive EVs compared to Veh-treated PMHs (Fig. 1F).

These findings were also confirmed using Huh7 cells (Fig. 1G).

Interestingly ITGβ1 expression was increased in the serum EVs of patients with NASH (Fig. 1H).

Collectively, these data indicate that ITGβ1 in an active conformation is selectively sorted into EVs released from lipotoxic hepatocytes.

SECTION

Hepatocyte lipotoxic treatment induces ITGβ1 activation and endocytic trafficking

PARAGRAPH

We further examined the activation and endocytic trafficking of ITGβ1 in hepatocytes under lipotoxic stress (Fig. 2A).

Conformation-specific antibodies against ITGβ1 cannot detect the SDS-denatured target protein, and thus are not suitable for immunoblot assay.

Therefore, to determine if hepatocyte ITGβ1 is activated by lipotoxic treatment, lysates from Veh or LPC-treated Huh7 cells were immunoprecipitated with the inactive (MAB13) or the active (9EG7) conformation-specific ITGβ1 antibodies, and immunoblotted with an antibody for total ITGβ1 (Fig. 2B).

Based on our prior report of p38 activation with lipotoxic treatment in hepatocytes,6,19 and the established role of p38 in ITG activation in different disease models,16,17 we examined whether p38 mediates LPC-induced ITGβ1 activation in hepatocyte.

LPC treatment causes a significant decrease in inactive (tyrosine phosphorylated ITGβ1 tail, higher molecular weight), and increase in active (tyrosine dephosphorylated tail, lower molecular weight) ITGβ1, which is reduced in the presence of the p38 inhibitor SB203580, indicating that lipotoxic stress-induced hepatocyte ITGβ1 activation occurs via a p38-mediated pathway.

Similar results were obtained with the mouse hepatocyte cell line AML12 (Fig. 2C), (the inactive conformation sensitive antibody MAB13 reacts only with human species hence it was not used with the mouse AML12 cells).

To confirm that the ITGβ1 9EG7 antibody immunoprecipitates active ITGβ1, we analyzed the ITGβ1 immunoprecipitates from vehicle and LPC-treated PMHs by MS, as previously described by us.6

The MS data was searched allowing for phosphostyrosine as a variable modification and showed absence of phosphorylation on the first NPxY motif on the ITGβ1 C terminal, confirming that the pulled ITGβ1 is in an active conformation (Table S1).

Furthermore, we employed immunofluorescence (IF) microscopy and confirmed that LPC treatment induced activation of ITGβ1, which was diminished with SB203580 (Fig. 2D).

Moreover, we noted that in lipotoxic hepatocytes, the active ITGβ1 accumulated in cytoplasmic structures consistent with intracellular vesicles (Fig. 2D, second panel).

To further explore the intracellular trafficking of active ITGβ1, we examined the co-localization of active ITGβ1 with the early endosome marker early endosome antigen (EEA) 1, the MVB marker CD63, and the late endosome marker Rab7.

ITGβ1 co-localization with EEA1, CD63 or Rab7 (Fig. 2E) was increased with LPC treatment when quantified using the Pearson’s correlation coefficient.

To examine if lipotoxicity regulates active ITGβ1 lysosomal degradation, we assessed the co-localization of active ITGβ1 with the lysosome marker LAMP1; however, there was no obvious co-localization of ITGβ1 with LAMP1 (Fig. S1).

Collectively, these results suggest that hepatocyte lipotoxic treatment induces ITGβ1 activation and endocytic trafficking, resulting in active ITGβ1 release in EVs.

SECTION

Lipotoxic hepatocytes release EVs in the circulation

PARAGRAPH

We have previously demonstrated that LPC treatment increases hepatocytes EVs release in vitro.6,8

To assure that this observation is not an artifact of the in vitro system, we developed a mouse model to track circulating EVs of hepatocyte origin (Fig. S2A).

We then quantified the hepatocyte-derived EVs in the plasma by nanoscale flowcyometry, and identified a 5-fold increase with the NASH-inducing diet (Fig. S3B).

These data conclusively demonstrate for the first time that lipotoxic hepatocytes release large number of EVs in the circulation in vivo.

SECTION

Lipotoxic hepatocyte-derived EVs promote monocytes adhesion to LSECs via an ITGβ1-dependent mechanism

PARAGRAPH

We have previously reported that EVs from lipotoxic hepatocytes induce MoMF chemotaxis.6

To understand the biological functions exerted by lipotoxic hepatocyte-derived EVs on monocytes, we performed RNA sequencing (RNAseq) on primary mouse monocytes incubated with EVs from LPC (LPC-EVs) or vehicle (Veh-EVs)-treated PMHs.

IPA of RNAseq data showed leukocyte adhesion and diapedesis-related signaling among the top overrepresented canonical pathways in monocytes stimulated with LPC-EVs, suggesting the involvement of LPC-EVs in monocyte adhesion to LSECs (Fig. 3A).

PARAGRAPH

To examine the interaction between lipotoxic EV-stimulated monocytes and LSECs, we co-cultured the human monocyte cell line, THP1, with EVs derived from equal number of hepatocytes treated with either vehicle or LPC.

EVs were labelled with a fluorescent lipophilic dye DiO.

Confocal microscopy revealed that monocytes incubated with LPC-EVs were more likely to adhere to LSECs (Fig. 3B).

We then subjected monocytes to live cell imaging with Z stack microscopy following incubation with EVs.

EVs were observed both on the surface and on deeper focal plane (intracellular) of the THP1 cells (Fig. 3C), suggesting that ITGβ1-enriched EVs interact with monocytes in a topography that allows them to potentially tether monocytes to LSECs.

Interestingly, many of these EVs are also internalized by monocytes (Fig. 3C), which has implications for ITGβ1 recycling to the cell surface.

To further explore if LPC-EVs enriched with ITGβ1 mediates monocyte adhesion to LSECs, a key stage in liver inflammation, we employed a flow-based adhesion assay using microfluidic chambers (Fig. S3A-B) coated with a monolayer of mouse primary LSECs.

Monocytes stimulated with LPC-EVs have enhanced adhesion to LSECs (Fig. 3D).

Interestingly this enhanced adhesion was diminished when monocytes were incubated with anti-ITGβ1 neutralizing antibody (ITGβ1Ab), suggesting that ITGβ1 on lipotoxic EVs may be responsible for EVs-induced monocytes adhesion to LSECs.

We further confirmed this finding using ITGβ1-knockdown Huh7 by shRNA technology (shITGβ1) (Fig. 3E-F, Fig. S3C).

Likewise, the adhesion of lipotoxic EV-stimulated monocytes to endothelial cells was reduced in the presence of ITGα9 neutralizing antibody (Fig. S3D).

Moreover, pretreatment of LSECs with a neutralizing antibody against VCAM-1 (an ITGα9β1 ligand expressed on LSECs under basal conditions as examined by flow cytometry), significantly diminished the adhesion of LPC-EV-stimulated monocytes to LSECs (Fig. 3F).

Taken together, these results support a role for LPC-EV ITGα9β1 in monocyte adhesion to LSEC via an ITGα9β1-VCAM-1 binding interactions.

Interestingly, monocyte inflammatory activation markers expression was also enhanced with lipotoxic EV stimulation (Fig. S4), supporting the proinflammatory role of lipotoxic EVs.

SECTION

Anti-ITGβ1 antibody treatment does not alter the metabolic phenotype or the steatosis in FFC diet-fed mice

PARAGRAPH

Based on the in vitro findings supporting a key role of lipotoxic EV ITGβ1 in monocyte adhesion to LSECs and potentially in liver inflammation, we examined the potential beneficial effect of ITGβ1 neutralizing antibody in our mouse model of diet-induced NASH.

Eight-week-old C57BL/6J wild-type mice were fed either chow or a diet high in saturated FFC for 24 weeks.

At 20 weeks of the diet mice were treated with either anti-ITGβ1 neutralizing antibody (ITGβ1Ab) or control IgG isotype antibody (IgG) twice per week for 4 weeks.

Firstly, we assessed the metabolic status of each group of mice.

Comprehensive Laboratory Animal Monitoring System study showed that total daily caloric intake (Fig. S5A), physical activity, energy expenditure, and respiratory quotient (Fig. 4A) were similar in the FFC-fed ITGβ1Ab-treated and control IgG-treated mice.

Body weight during the whole study period (Fig. 4B, Fig. S5B), liver weight (Fig. S5C), and liver to body weight ratio (Fig. 4C) at the time of sacrifice were significantly increased with the FFC diet, but similar between ITGβ1Ab-treated and control IgG-treated groups.

Likewise, homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) (Fig. 4D), and triglyceride content in liver tissue (Fig. 4E) were increased with the FFC diet, but were not different between the 2 treatment groups on the FFC diet; although HOMA-IR has some limitations in assessing insulin sensitivity in vivo.

Moreover, histological examination of the liver by hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stain displayed similar extent of steatosis in the FFC-fed mice from the different treatment groups (Fig. 4F).

Interestingly, ITGβ1Ab-treated mice had less inflammatory infiltrates compared to IgG-treated, FFC-fed mice (Fig. 4F).

Consistent with the in vitro data, active ITGβ1 expression was increased with FFC diet when assessed by immunohistochemistry and reduced with the ITGβ1 neutralizing Ab (Fig. S6A).

Collectively, ITGβ1Ab treatment in FFC-fed mice was well tolerated and did not affect the metabolic phenotype or the hepatic steatosis.

SECTION

Anti-ITGβ1 antibody treatment in FFC-fed mice attenuates hepatic inflammation

PARAGRAPH

Given the key role of ITGβ1 in monocyte adhesion to LSECs (Fig. 3D-F), we examined whether ITGβ1Ab reduces hepatic proinflammatory monocyte recruitment and macrophage-mediated liver inflammation in our dietary mouse model of NASH.

Immunostaining of liver tissues revealed that ITGβ1Ab-treated mice had reduced positive area for Mac-2, a marker of phagocytically active macrophages (Fig. 5A-B).

This finding was supported by the decrease in hepatic mRNA expressions of the macrophage marker Cd68, the infiltrating proinflammatory monocyte marker Ccr2, proinflammatory cytokines Tnf-α, Il12b (Fig. 5C, Fig. S6B) in FFC-fed ITGβ1Ab-treated mice.

Furthermore, flow cytometric analysis of the intrahepatic leukocyte (IHL) population identified an increase in CD45+ cells in the FFC-fed mice, without significant alteration with ITGβ1Ab treatment (Fig. 5D).

In contrast, ITGβ1Ab-treated FFC-fed mice did display a significant decrease in the infiltrating proinflammatory monocytes (M1 polarized) defined as CD45+CD11bhiF4/80intCCR2+ cells.

Collectively, these findings suggest that blockade of ITGβ1 reduces hepatic proinflammatory monocyte infiltration and MoMF-mediated liver inflammation.

SECTION

Anti-ITGβ1 antibody treatment in FFC-fed mice reduces the proinflammatory monocyte hepatic infiltration

PARAGRAPH

Macrophages are characterized using a variety of criteria, including ontogeny (yolk sac- vs. bone marrow-derived) and function (proinflammatory vs. restorative).4

Liver macrophages are also frequently classified as resident macrophages (Kupffer cells) or recruited macrophages (i.e., circulating bone marrow-derived monocytes differentiating into macrophages).

Functionally, macrophages exist as a continuum, with tissue damaging or proinflammatory at one end of the spectrum (M1-like), and restorative macrophages involved in tissue repair and healing at the other end (M2-like).

While MoMFs play a crucial role in NASH pathogenesis and progression,26 various other immune cells including neutrophils, dendritic cells, and lymphocytes are involved in NASH pathogenesis.27,28

Moreover, ITGβ1 neutralizing antibodies are known to inhibit T lymphocyte trafficking,29 and might also affect neutrophil trafficking to the liver.

Therefore, to determine the contribution of the different subset of macrophages, and other immune cells in ITGβ1Ab protective effect in NASH, we profiled B lymphocytes, T lymphocytes, natural killer (NK) cells, NKT cells, dendritic cells and neutrophils in addition to monocytes and macrophages using the state of the art technology mass CyTOF.

Twenty-eight clusters were obtained (Fig. 6A) based on the intensities of 24 different cell surface markers (Fig. 6B).

Each group of mice displayed a characteristic pattern of clusters abundance (Fig. 6C and D).

Out of 28 clusters obtained by CyTOF, 13 clusters were differentially expressed between the study groups and categorized into distinct leukocyte subpopulations based on the intensities of individual cell surface markers (Table S2).

In particular, clusters 5 and 9 had typical expression markers of infiltrating proinflammatory MoMFs, the abundance of these clusters was increased with the FFC diet, but significantly reduced with ITGβ1Ab treatment (Fig. 7A), confirming the flow cytometry data.

Likewise, clusters 7 and 17 (Fig. 7B) defined as infiltrating MoMFs, were reduced in the FFC-fed ITGβ1Ab-treated mice.

In contrast, clusters 1 and 2 had typical marker expression patterns of alternative, M2 polarized, or restorative macrophages defined by increased expression of the anti-inflammatory surface marker CD206, as well as the hepatic macrophage markers Lgals, MERTK, and F4/80.

The abundance of clusters 1 and 2 was decreased in the FFC-fed mice, but significantly increased with ITGβ1 blockade (Fig. 7C).

We next assessed other clusters defined as B cell-like cluster 8 (Fig. S7A), neutrophil-like cluster 15 (Fig. S7B), dendritic cell-like cluster 19 (Fig. S7C), and T lymphocyte cluster 16 and 21 (Fig. S7D).

These clusters showed no statistically significant difference between the FFC-fed experimental groups, indicating that the protective effect of ITGβ1 blockade in the FFC diet induced NASH is mainly through reduced proinflammatory monocyte trafficking and retention in the liver without a significant effect on other immune cells.

SECTION

Anti-ITGβ1 antibody treatment reduces FFC diet-induced liver injury and fibrosis in murine NASH

PARAGRAPH

To determine if reduced hepatic inflammation through ITGβ1 blockade may protect against NASH progression and liver fibrosis, we examined liver injury and fibrosis.

FFC-fed, ITGβ1Ab-treated mice were relatively protected against hepatocyte apoptosis compared to control IgG-treated mice, as demonstrated by reduced TUNEL-positive cells (Fig. 8A) and serum alanine aminotransferase levels (Fig. 8B) as well as reduced NAFLD activity score (Fig. 8C) when compared to IgG-treated mice on the same diet.

Next, we examined the expressions of fibrosis-related genes, mRNA levels of both Collagen 1a1 (Col1a1) and Osteopontin (Spp1) were elevated in the FFC-fed mice, and significantly decreased with ITGβ1Ab treatment (Fig. 8D), indicating the possible anti-fibrotic effect of ITGβ1Ab.

This finding was further confirmed by Sirius red staining (Fig. 8E) as well as α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) immunohistochemistry (Fig. 8F).

Taken together, these findings indicate a protective effect of ITGβ1Ab against NASH-associated liver injury and fibrosis in diet-induced NASH.

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

The current study provides insights regarding the mechanism by which lipotoxic hepatocyte-derived EVs may regulate peripheral blood monocyte adhesion to LSECs and hepatic recruitment and retention during NASH.

The current data indicate that: i) lipotoxic insult in hepatocyte activates ITGβ1 and facilitates its endocytic trafficking and release in EVs; ii) lipotoxic hepatocyte-derived EVs enhance monocyte adhesion to LSECs mainly via their ITGα9β1 cargo binding interaction with LSEC VCAM-1; in FFC diet-induced NASH; iii) ITGβ1 neutralizing antibody reduces proinflammatory monocyte hepatic infiltration; iv) blocking ITGβ1 attenuates liver injury, inflammation and fibrosis.

To our knowledge, our report is the first comprehensive profiling of IHLs in murine NASH using CyTOF, and the first study of a therapeutic effect of ITGβ1 inhibition in diet-induced NASH.

Our findings are discussed in greater details below.

PARAGRAPH

Herein, we build on our prior observation implicating EVs released from lipotoxic hepatocytes in the sterile proinflammatory response in NASH via their chemotactic cargo CXCL106 and examine the signaling molecules responsible for monocyte homing to the liver and adhesion to LSECs, a key step for the initiation of inflammation in NASH.

We demonstrate for the first time that toxic lipid treatment in hepatocytes induces an active conformation switch of ITGβ1 via a p38 signaling pathway.

PARAGRAPH

The role of ITG-enriched EVs has been established in organotropism, and tumor cell migration.21,30

Thus, EV-mediated intercellular ITG signaling is a biologically plausible concept; and our study is the first to identify a non-neoplastic role of ITG on EVs.

Moreover, we define the molecular mediators engaged in the adhesion process by employing microfluidic chambers, the optimal technology to study cross talk between 2 different cell types, in a flow-based paradigm31.

Here we demonstrate that EV-stimulated monocyte adhesion to LSECs was diminished with Itgβ1 knockdown in the EV donor lipotoxic hepatocytes or with pharmacological inhibition of ITGβ1, ITGα9 or its LSECs ligand VCAM-1.

Interestingly, recent in vivo study using zebrafish embryo showed targeting of ITGβ1-enriched EVs to the venous endothelium and macrophages.32

Inspection of tumor-derived EVs in close proximity to the vessel wall revealed arrest of EVs following a rolling behavior, suggesting that it could be driven by progressive activation of adhesion molecules.32

A very similar behavior was observed for endogenous EVs in zebrafish.33

Furthermore, EVs either surfed on the filopodia or were taken up by macrophages leading to reduced macrophage motility, and polarization to the M1-like phenotype.

Although the exact molecular mediators of the interaction of EVs with both endothelial cells and macrophages were not examined in these studies, these findings relate to ours and support that ITGβ1-enriched EVs interact with monocytes in a topography that enables binding to LSECs, either by fusion/surfing on the cell membrane or endocytosis and recycling back to the surface.

Future effort will be concentrated on defining the molecular mediators responsible for hepatocyte-derived EVs uptake by target cells (LSECs, and MoMFs).

Furthermore, our data demonstrate for the first time that the number of circulating EVs of hepatocyte origin is increased in mice with NASH (Fig. S2).

The hepatocyte-derived EV gradient is the highest in the liver microenvironment, mainly the sinusoidal space where EVs likely confer the liver homing signal in response to lipotoxic injury.

Our findings are also in line with published proteomics analysis of circulating EVs from NAFLD mice, showing enrichment with cell adhesion-related proteins.34

PARAGRAPH

To examine the role of ITGβ1 in monocyte adhesion and liver inflammation in vivo, we utilized a well-established dietary mouse model with high fidelity to human NASH.35

In the current study, we demonstrate that the FFC diet induces similar changes in both ITGβ1Ab and IgG isotype-treated mice in the metabolic profile and hepatic steatosis.

Interestingly, ITGβ1Ab-treated mice on the FFC diet have a relative attenuation of all the injurious features of NASH, when compared with isotype-treated mice.

Moreover, our CyTOF data did not show significant alteration in the T lymphocyte, B lymphocyte, NK cells, neutrophil and dendritic cells populations with ITGβ1 antibody treatment in FFC-fed mice, suggesting that the therapeutic benefit of ITGβ1 antibody is mainly through reduced proinflammatory monocyte infiltration.

PARAGRAPH

Inflammation correlates with liver fibrosis and disease progression in NASH patients.26

Hence, improved liver fibrosis in ITGβ1Ab-treated FFC-fed mice might be a consequence of reduced MoMF-mediated hepatic inflammation.

However, we cannot exclude the possibility that blockade of endogenously expressed ITGβ1 in other liver cell types such as hepatic stellate cells might have contributed to the reduced fibrosis.

PARAGRAPH

EVs are emerging as key players in cell-to-cell communication.

Hence, modulation of EV interaction with target cells by ITGβ1 pharmacological inhibition would offer a specific therapeutic strategy to block the proinflammatory signal originating from lipotoxic hepatocytes.

ITG-based therapeutics have shown clinically significant benefits in patients with chronic inflammatory diseases,29 and may have an expanded indication for use in patients with NASH.

Thus, the current study advances our understanding of the pathogenic mechanisms linking ITG signaling to liver inflammation in NASH, and identify new potential anti-inflammatory therapeutic strategies, that reduces the propensity of LSECs to recruit harmful proinflammatory monocytes.

SECTION

Financial support

PARAGRAPH

This work was supported by NIH grant DK111397 (to SHI), North American Society of Pediatric Gastroenterology Hepatology and Nutrition Young Investigator Award/Nestle Nutrition Award and Gilead Science career development award (to SHI), the Mayo Clinic K2R pipeline and Children Research Center.

F.L is funded by a postdoctoral fellowship from the Fonds de Recherche du Quebec-Sante (FRQS).

SECTION

Conflict of interest

PARAGRAPH

The authors have no conflict of interest related to the manuscript.

PARAGRAPH

Please refer to the accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.

SECTION

Authors’ contributions

PARAGRAPH

Q.G.: study design, data acquisition and analysis, manuscript drafting.

K.F.: study design, data acquisition and analysis, manuscript drafting.

F.L.: data acquisition and analysis, manuscript revision.

L.H.G.S: data acquisition.

P.H.: data acquisition and manuscript revision.

A. Krishnan: data acquisition.

A. Kabashima: data acquisition.

K.D.P.: data acquisition and analysis, manuscript revision.

B.M.: data acquisition and analysis, manuscript revision.

H.A.: data acquisition.

Y.G.: data acquisition and analysis.

A.R.: data acquisition and analysis, manuscript revision.

S.H.I.: concept formulation, study design, data analysis, manuscript drafting and revision.