10.1016/j.jhep.2018.06.014

ABSTRACT

TITLE

Caspase recruitment domain 6 protects against hepatic ischemia/reperfusion injury by suppressing ASK1

PARAGRAPH

The hepatic injury caused by ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) insult is predominantly determined by the complex interplay of sterile inflammation and liver cell death.

Caspase recruitment domain family member 6 (CARD6) was initially shown to play important roles in NF-κB activation.

In our preliminary studies, CARD6 downregulation was closely related to hepatic I/R injury in liver transplantation patients and mouse models.

Thus, we hypothesized that CARD6 protects against hepatic I/R injury and investigated the underlying molecular mechanisms.

PARAGRAPH

A partial hepatic I/R operation was performed in hepatocyte-specific Card6 knockout mice (HKO), Card6 transgenic mice with CARD6 overexpression specifically in hepatocytes (HTG), and the corresponding control mice.

Hepatic histology, serum aminotransferases, inflammatory cytokines/chemokines, cell death, and inflammatory signaling were examined to assess liver damage.

The molecular mechanisms of CARD6 function were explored in vivo and in vitro.

PARAGRAPH

Liver injury was alleviated in Card6-HTG mice compared with control mice as shown by decreased cell death, lower serum aminotransferase levels, and reduced inflammation and infiltration, whereas Card6-HKO mice had the opposite phenotype.

Mechanistically, phosphorylation of ASK1 and its downstream effectors JNK and p38 were increased in the livers of Card6-HKO mice but repressed in those of Card6-HTG mice.

Furthermore, ASK1 knockdown normalized the effect of CARD6 deficiency on the activation of NF-κB, JNK and p38, while ASK1 overexpression abrogated the suppressive effect of CARD6.

CARD6 was also shown to interact with ASK1.

Mutant CARD6 that lacked the ability to interact with ASK1 could not inhibit ASK1 and failed to protect against hepatic I/R injury.

PARAGRAPH

CARD6 is a novel protective factor against hepatic I/R injury that suppresses inflammation and liver cell death by inhibiting the ASK1 signaling pathway.

