10.1016/j.jhep.2018.02.031

FULLTEXT

TITLE

HEV-positive blood donations represent a relevant infection risk for immunosuppressed recipients

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

HEV infections are present worldwide.1

Consumption of pork meat has been considered to be the major source of HEV Genotype (GT) 3 infections in Europe.

In addition to zoonotic transmission, blood products were shown to be a potential source of acute and chronic HEV infection in industrialised countries.2,3

The anti-HEV seroprevalence rate in Europe, depicting the number of people previously exposed to HEV, varies largely depending on the region and the assay used.4

A high seroprevalence rate of 30% was found in healthy German individuals using the sensitive Wantai anti-HEV IgG assay.5

In addition to serological studies, blood donors were tested for HEV viraemia by PCR in various European studies, and rates of HEV positivity from 1:726 to 1:3,333 have been determined.6–11

The largest of these studies was conducted in the UK.

In this study, 225,000 blood donations were tested in pools of 24 samples by an in-house assay, and 79 specimens tested positive for HEV PCR (1 out of 2,850).

The likelihood of developing clinically relevant hepatitis E after transfusion of an HEV-contaminated blood product was 42%,10 while in a Japanese study, 50% of recipients of HEV-contaminated blood products developed HEV infection.12

Since it became apparent how frequently HEV was found in blood products, routine testing of blood products has been discussed controversially in many European countries.

In the vast majority of these countries, HEV screening has not been implemented, while authorities in the UK, Ireland, and the Netherlands decided to test all blood products for HEV.13

The aim of the present study was to determine the prevalence of blood-borne HEV infections at our academic tertiary care centre in Northern Germany and to evaluate whether routine HEV testing of blood products should be performed.

SECTION

Materials and methods

SECTION

Routine screening

PARAGRAPH

Routine screening of all blood donations for HEV RNA was implemented at our centre, the University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, in October 2016.

Here, we present data from a three-day preliminary testing phase in September 2016 in addition to 8-month routine screening data following the implementation of screening (October 2016 to May 2017).

Identical protocols were applied in preliminary and routine screening phases.

The study was in line with the recommendations of the local ethics committee.

SECTION

Molecular techniques

PARAGRAPH

Pools of 24 donations were tested using the commercial Roche Cobas® HEV-PCR-assay (lower limit of detection 18.6 IU/ml) on the Roche cobas 6800 platform.

Reactive pools were individually tested to identify HEV RNA-positive donors.

A laboratory-developed PCR test calibrated to the first World Health Organization international standard for HEV was used to determine the quantitative viral load.14

Preparation of the samples for sequencing was performed as follows: viral RNA was automatically extracted via QIAsymphony (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany) followed by cDNA synthesis using SuperScript IV (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Darmstadt, Germany), random 6-mer, and NEBNext® Ultra II Non-Directional RNA Second Strand Synthesis Module (NEB, Frankfurt am Main, Germany).

All clean-up steps were performed with Agencourt® AMPure® XP beads (NEB).

To ensure efficient DNA shearing (Bioruptor® Plus; Diagenode, Seraing, Belgium), human cDNA was added (5 ng/μl in 56.5 µl volume).

Illumina (San Diego, CA, USA) next-generation sequencing library preparation was performed using the NEBNext Ultra™ DNA Library Prep Kit (NEB).

Amplified libraries were used in HepE Target Capture Enrichment using custom xGen® Lockdown® Probes (Integrated DNA Technologies, Skokie, IL, USA).

Locked-down libraries were amplified by KAPA HiFi HotStart ReadyMix (Sigma-Aldrich, Darmstadt, Germany) and the NEXTflex ChIP Primer Mix (Bioo Scientific Corporation, Austin, TX, USA).

The quality of the library was ensured by Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA).

PARAGRAPH

Sequencing was performed on a MiSeq benchtop sequencer (2x250PE; Illumina).

CLC Genomics Workbench 11 (QIAGEN) was used to generate HEV consensus sequences.

Since the whole genome coverage was achieved in highly viraemic blood donors, HEV RNA Region 4254–4560nt (RNA-dependent RNA polymerase domain) was used for genotyping.15

After alignment, a phylogenetic tree analysis was performed using Tamura–Nei as genetic distance model, neighbour joining as the tree-building method, and bootstrap resampling with 1,000 and topology threshold set to 50%.

Partial RNA sequences (Region 4254–4560nt) can be downloaded at the European Nucleotide Archive (Accession numbers LT984644–LT984650).

PARAGRAPH

Moreover, HEV PCR-positive individuals were tested for anti-HEV IgG and IgM using a commercial assay according to the manufacturer’s instructions (recomBlot; MIKROGEN, Hilden, Germany).

SECTION

Retrospective analysis

PARAGRAPH

Stored samples from previous donations by HEV RNA-positive donors were analysed individually to determine the duration of HEV viraemia to reveal possible previous donations of HEV-contaminated blood products to patients and to assess for potential failures of the routine screening protocol.

SECTION

Blood donor interviews

PARAGRAPH

HEV RNA-positive donors were invited for follow-up consultations and were asked to participate in a standardised questionnaire.

A control cohort, including 256 non-viraemic blood donors, was asked to answer the same questionnaire.

SECTION

Data analysis

PARAGRAPH

All statistical analyses were performed using the IBM SPSS software package (version 20).

Spearman’s coefficient analysis was applied to quantify correlations.

Percentages were compared using Chi-square or Fisher’s exact testing as appropriate.

The Mann–Whitney test was used to compare continuous variables.

A p value <0.05 was considered statistically significant.

PARAGRAPH

For further details regarding the materials used, please refer to the CTAT table.

SECTION

Results

SECTION

Identification of HEV RNA-positive blood donors through prospective screening

PARAGRAPH

From October 2016 to May 2017, 18,737 blood donations were prospectively tested for HEV viraemia at the blood transfusion service of the University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf.

HEV viraemia was detected in 23 asymptomatic blood donors (D1–D23), resulting in an HEV RNA prevalence of 0.12% (1:815) in this cohort (Table 1; Fig. 1).

At the time of blood donation, only 3 out of 23 HEV RNA-positive blood donors presented with detectable anti-HEV IgG and IgM; one donor tested positive for anti-HEV IgM only.

Two positive donors showed elevated liver enzymes (alanine aminotransferase [ALT] >twice upper limit of normal) at the time of donation (D4: ALT 192 U/L and D12: ALT 101 U/L; Table 1).

A longitudinal analysis of one of these donors revealed an increase in ALT during follow-up (D4: ALT 1,287 U/L).

One further donor did not show elevated aminotransferases at the time point of donation, but developed acute hepatitis during follow-up (D6: ALT 955 U/L).

ALT and HEV virus loads were significantly correlated at the time of donation (r = 0.43; p = 0.04; Fig. 2).

HEV viraemia rapidly resolved in all donors with elevated ALT.

Most HEV RNA-positive donors showed low HEV viraemia measurements (HEV viral load ≤1,000 IU/ml in 15 out of 23 [65%] positive donors; Fig. 2).

Interestingly, three asymptomatic HEV RNA-positive donors presented with HEV viraemia for up to three months (D1, D10, and D19), while HEV viraemia in one donor exceeded four months (D2; Table 1).

Genotyping was successful in 7 out of 23 blood donors (all with viraemia ≥1,000 IU/ml).

Interestingly, six out of seven sequences belonged to GT 3, Group 216 (Table 1; Fig. 3).

SECTION

Retrospective analysis of previous blood donations by HEV RNA-positive blood donors

PARAGRAPH

The retrospective analysis of stored samples of all prospectively tested HEV RNA-positive donors revealed that four viraemic donors already tested positive in stored samples from previous blood donations (Table 2).

D1, identified in the preliminary screening phase, had been HEV RNA positive for three months before the implementation of routine screening and had given rise to nine additional HEV RNA-positive blood products (all platelet concentrates), which were transfused into nine patients (R1–R9).

All of them were patients with underlying haematological diseases, two of them stem-cell-transplant recipients.

Three of them (R1, R4, and R5) died within 30 days after transfusion, while three additional recipients died 4–5 months after transfusion.

In none of these deceased patients, evidence of acute or chronic HEV infection was detected.

In contrast, one immunosuppressed recipient (R8) tested positive for HEV RNA in serum twice (up to 550 IU/ml HEV RNA) before his demise due to acute-on-chronic liver failure complicated by Pseudomonas septicemia (Fig. 1; Table 2).

HEV infection might have been an additional insult in this patient.

PARAGRAPH

We detected another three HEV RNA-positive donors (D10, D13, and D19; Fig. 1; Table 2) who tested positive in stored samples of previous donations in an unpooled, retrospective analysis.

In these three cases, testing of the previously donated blood in pools of 24 had failed to identify viraemic donations.

HEV RNA-positive blood products were, therefore, transfused into R10–R14 (Fig. 1; Table 2).

R12 and R13 were patients with underlying haematological diseases.

In both patients, we were able to exclude that HEV transmission resulted in clinically apparent hepatitis E and none of them developed aminotransferases of greater than twice above the upper limit of normal.

Both individuals tested HEV RNA negative nine weeks after receiving the HEV RNA-positive transfusion.

One liver-transplant recipient (R11) died due to sepsis one month after transfusion.

HEV infection could not be ruled out or confirmed in this patient because of lack of data and stored serum samples.

Two immunocompetent patients (R10 and R14) received HEV RNA-positive blood products to substitute blood loss during operation.

R10 was an immunocompetent female who received red-blood-cell concentrates donated by an HEV RNA-positive donor (D10) during cardiac surgery.

This patient developed an acute self-limited episode of hepatitis E (HEV viral load: 70,000 IU/ml).

R14 developed an acute ALT increase of unknown origin; he died in the further course of illness.

Hepatitis E could neither be ruled out nor confirmed in this patient.

SECTION

Risk factors of acquiring HEV infection in blood donors

PARAGRAPH

To evaluate risk factors of acquiring HEV infection, all HEV RNA-positive blood donors were invited for follow-up consultations.

18 out of 23 (78%) HEV viraemic donors participated in a standardised questionnaire to assess the blood donors’ exposure to possible sources of HEV infection.

Interestingly, 16 out of 18 (89%) regularly consumed pork meat and 12 out of 18 (67%) even reported on consumption of raw pork tartare in the last two months (Table 3).

None of the HEV RNA-positive donors was vegetarian.

One out of 18 (6%) had travelled outside of Europe in the last two months (Israel) and 17 out of 18 (94%) lived in urban areas.

Interestingly, a blood-donor couple (D8 and D9) ate undercooked pork liver four weeks prior to their blood donation.

Residual parts of this liver were still availably stored at the donors’ home and tested HEV RNA positive (6,200 IU/ml).

A control cohort of 256 unselected blood donors was asked to fill out the same questionnaire.

The HEV RNA-positive blood donors and the control cohort did not differ significantly in age and sex.

Within the control population, 87% (223 out of 256) of the study subjects regularly consumed pork meat; however, only 35% (89 out of 256; p = 0.01) had eaten raw pork tartare in the last two months.

There was no significant difference in the consumption of meat in general, cooked pork meat, or shellfish/mussels (Table 3).

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

Here, we report the first study describing the experience with prospective routine HEV screening of blood donations at a German academic tertiary care centre.

The authors of individual case reports and small retrospective case series have studied the severity of transfusion-associated HEV infections.2,3,12

Furthermore, a number of prospective studies have evaluated the frequency of HEV RNA-positive blood donations in numerous European countries,6–10 and a mathematical modelling estimated the cost-effectiveness of testing blood donations for HEV.17

However, there are still major concerns about the clinical relevance and true burden of transfusion-transmitted HEV infections.

PARAGRAPH

By implementation of routine testing of blood donors for HEV, which resulted in the identification of 23 out of 18,737 (0.12%; 1:815) HEV-positive blood donations, transfusion of 63 HEV RNA-positive manufactured blood products (20 erythrocyte concentrates, 23 thrombocyte concentrates, and 20 plasma products) was averted.

Only 3 out of 23 of our HEV-infected blood donors presented with elevated aminotransferases.

These data suggest a low manifestation index of 13%.

It has previously been shown that only a minority of European HEV infections lead to symptomatic courses of the disease.

However, to date, it has not been demonstrated how many asymptomatic HEV-positive carriers develop biochemical signs of hepatitis when followed up in stringent systematic monitoring.

The data shown here also represent the first report of persistent HEV viraemia for more than four months in an asymptomatic blood donor (D2).

The duration is considerably longer than observed previously in European blood donors (maximum 52 out of 68 days in German/Dutch blood donors, respectively),18,19 and consequently, one HEV RNA-positive blood donor can give rise to several contaminated blood products during the time of prolonged viraemia.

It has been suggested to define chronic HEV infection as HEV viraemia lasting for more than three months.20

This definition was challenged, since a case of HEV carriership for more than three months followed by spontaneous clearance was described previously in a liver-transplant recipient.21

The present study demonstrates that persistent HEV viraemia for durations of even more than four months followed by spontaneous clearance must be considered in immunocompetent individuals.

This raises the question if chronic HEV infection should be defined as persistent viraemia for more than six months analogous to HBV or HCV infections.

PARAGRAPH

In addition to the discussion about blood-product safety, our findings contribute to an enhanced understanding of HEV epidemiology in Europe.

There are increasing numbers of autochthonously acquired cases of hepatitis E documented in Europe during the last decade22 with a high likelihood of a much larger group of asymptomatic HEV infections.

In the present study, six out of seven sequenced HEV strains belonged to HEV GT 3, Group 2.

While only 6% of HEV GT 3 infections belonged to Group 2 in a previously reported English cohort recruited between 2003 and 2009, the proportion increased up to 58% in a cohort recruited between 2010 and 2012.16

The reasons for the emergence of GT 3, Group 2 in England are still unknown.

The present study suggests a similar effect in Germany for the first time.

These epidemiological aspects are relevant and require further investigation.

PARAGRAPH

A retrospective analysis of previous blood donations by HEV RNA-positive blood donors demonstrated that even a highly sensitive assay (such as the cobas 6800) does not guarantee absolute safety: in three cases, routine screening failed to detect viraemic donations in pools of 24.

Therefore, the aforementioned HEV RNA prevalence might be erroneously low.

We are aware that our protocol does not result in guaranteed HEV-free blood products, and perhaps a smaller pool size of 12 or 4 samples or unpooled testing would result in increased sensitivity.

Further studies are needed to determine the optimal pool size, allowing covering donors with very low viraemia.

HEV RNA-positive blood products were transfused into 14 patients despite (n = 5) or before routine (n = 9) testing.

We found evidence of HEV infection in two recipients (R8 and R10) of the contaminated blood products.

As shown in R8, transfusion-transmitted HEV infection might lead to potentially severe or even fatal consequences in immunosuppressed individuals.

Three out of fourteen (21%) recipients of HEV-contaminated blood products died within a period of 30 days after transfusion (Table 2).

It remains incompletely understood whether HEV infection in these particularly vulnerable patients added an additional insult to the natural course of the severe underlying disease, or if the HEV exposure had no impact on the fatal clinical outcome of these patients.

It has already been shown that transfusion-transmitted HEV infections in transplant recipients can lead to severe courses of the disease.2,3

Approximately 50% of HEV-infected immunosuppressed individuals develop a chronic infection and are at risk to develop HEV-related cirrhosis.23,24

PARAGRAPH

In this study, eating raw pork tartare (a traditional German dish) represented a relevant risk for the acquisition of HEV infection in blood donors in Northern Germany.

Domestic pigs are evidentially a major reservoir of HEV.25

A couple of blood donors was identified (D8 and D9) of whom both tested positive for HEV RNA and for whom undercooked pork liver was determined as the source of infection.

The consumption of a pork liver dish resulted in asymptomatic HEV viraemia in both donors after four weeks (HEV viral loads of 120 and 840 U/ml, respectively).

Further studies are warranted to evaluate the infectivity and differences of the clinical course of food-borne vs. transfusion-transmitted HEV infections.

PARAGRAPH

In summary, the data presented here revealed a high HEV RNA prevalence among blood donors in Northern Germany, presented two cases of transfusion-transmitted HEV infection, and identified raw pork meat as the source of infection.

While immunosuppressed patients should be regularly reminded to avoid consumption of raw and undercooked meat to lower the risk of food-borne infections, blood component therapy may be necessary and unpreventable in certain situations.

At tertiary care centres, solid organ transplant recipients, stem-cell-transplant recipients, and haematological or rheumatological patients are over-represented.

Especially, these vulnerable patient populations benefit from routine HEV screening of blood products.

Our data suggest that routine HEV screening of blood products should be implemented at least in European tertiary care centres and in centres with a high proportion of immunosuppressed patients.

SECTION

Financial support

PARAGRAPH

The authors received no financial support to produce this manuscript.

SECTION

Conflict of interest

PARAGRAPH

ML reports personal fees from lectures and advising for Roche Diagnostics, and grants from validation of laboratory-developed-test assays on the cobas 6800 (Roche), outside the submitted work.

SP reports personal fees from Roche Diagnostics and MSD, outside the submitted work.

PARAGRAPH

Please refer to the accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.

SECTION

Authors’ contributions

PARAGRAPH

DW, ML, and SP developed the concept of the study and wrote the manuscript.

DW and SP coordinated the follow-up of HEV viraemic blood donors.

ML, SG, and NF were responsible for the sequencing.

ML, SP, UD, JB and JH coordinated the collection, pooling, and testing of blood samples.

JH, DW, FA, MR, TH, and SP supervised the data collection and reviewed the drafts.

MMA, AWL, JSW and BG revised the manuscript for important intellectual content.

All authors reviewed the final manuscript.