10.1016/j.jhep.2018.12.027

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Outcomes of radiofrequency ablation as first-line therapy for hepatocellular carcinoma less than 3 cm in potentially transplantable patients

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

The optimal approach for transplantable patients with early unifocal HCC is unclear.

Small HCC (BCLC-0 or A) can be treated with ablation, liver resection, or liver transplantation (LT) as first-line therapies.1

Although the results of LT are excellent, most jurisdictions currently only assign model for end-stage liver disease (MELD) exception points to patients with larger HCC based on the belief that if resection or radiofrequency ablation (RFA) do not work, transplantation can be undertaken as a second curative procedure.2

PARAGRAPH

RFA of early HCC provides a 90% complete response3 and a 5-year survival rate of 66–86% even in candidates unfit for resection.4,5

Outcomes following RFA are similar to surgical resection, especially for lesions smaller than 3 cm.6

HCC recurrence after ablation of small HCC occurs in up to 60–80% of patients by 5 years, mainly due to de novo tumors.7,8

Unfortunately, there is little data on how often these recurrences exceed the criteria for a potentially curative liver transplant.9

The present study was therefore undertaken to assess the incidence and risk factors for HCC recurrence outside of the Milan criteria after locoregional therapies.

The study was performed in patients with unifocal HCC ≤3 cm who were treated with RFA and had no contraindications for LT at the time of ablation.

Our primary aim was to identify the characteristics of patients for whom transplantation might be the best first-line treatment.

SECTION

Patients and methods

SECTION

Study design and population

PARAGRAPH

This is a retrospective cohort study from a large academic institution, the University Health Network (UHN) in Toronto, Canada.

We assessed all adults (age ≥18-years old) with new diagnoses of solitary HCC up to 3 cm who underwent RFA between February 1st, 2000 and March 31st, 2015.

All patients included in this study were reviewed by the UHN HCC Multidisciplinary Board and were determined to be most appropriate for RFA as first-line treatment.

In our institution, all treatment decisions are individualized after a combined consideration of tumor size, location, liver function, patient comorbidities, and functional status.

Patients with profound liver dysfunction (MELD >15) are typically referred for transplant consideration as definitive therapy.

In patients with well compensated liver function, either RFA or surgery are offered as first-line treatment.

For lesions <2.0 cm, RFA is offered as first-line therapy.

For lesions between 2.0 and 2.5 cm, surgical resection or RFA are offered depending on tumor location and patient characteristics.

Patients with solitary tumors between 2.5 and 3.0 cm are offered resection.

Those that are not suitable for resection are evaluated on a case-by-case basis for either RFA or transplantation.

The choice between ablation or LT is made based on tumor location and severity of underlying liver disease by consensus at the UHN HCC Multidisciplinary Board.

Portal hypertension was diagnosed in most cases with indirect measures (platelet count <100,000 and or elevated bilirubin and/or elevated bilirubin and/or presence of varices and/or splenomegaly).

In cases where it was unclear, direct measurement was performed with a hepatic venous pressure gradient, where significant portal hypertension was defined as a gradient ≥10 mmHg.

Fig. S1 shows the algorithm for the solitary HCC ≤3 cm at our institution.

PARAGRAPH

The study population was composed of those patients that fulfilled all of the following inclusion criteria: i) new diagnosis of HCC based on imaging criteria consistent with international guidelines10 or by histological assessment of a radiologically indeterminate tumor; ii) single HCC up to 3 cm in maximum diameter; iii) not a resection candidate; iv) the patient underwent RFA as first-line therapy for their HCC; v) patients had achieved tumoral complete response after a single ablation procedure; vi) the patient was otherwise a transplantable candidate at the time of ablation.

Transplantability was defined as any patient younger than 70 years old, with no medical comorbidities that would preclude transplantation.

Complete response was defined with the modified RECIST criteria.11

Patients who did not achieve complete tumoral response after the first RFA, who did not qualify as transplantable, or underwent any other HCC treatment before the first HCC recurrence were excluded.

Patients who did not have complete response after the first ablation were excluded to homogenize the cohort, as we were most interested in the natural history of post-ablation disease recurrence, rather than incompletely ablated tumors.

In patients with single HCC ≤3 cm RFA was considered a bridging treatment if the patient was already listed for LT (due to decompensated cirrhosis) and thereafter developed HCC while listed; or if the indication for transplant was decompensated cirrhosis in association with HCC, and the patient was therefore listed for LT prior to any HCC recurrence.

Patients that received RFA as a bridge to transplant were excluded from this analysis.

Patients were divided in 2 groups according to the HCC size at the time of ablation: HCC ≤2 cm and HCC >2 cm.

This study was approved by the UHN Research Ethics Board (CAPCR ID 16-5285).

This study complies with the ethical guidelines of the 1975 Declaration of Helsinki and no organs from prisoners were used in this research.

This study complies with the STROBE Statement for observational studies.12

SECTION

Ablation techniques

PARAGRAPH

Patients were considered eligible for RFA under the following conditions: single HCC under 3 cm, acceptable liver function (Child-Pugh A or B), no encephalopathy (unless previous mild encephalopathy and currently well controlled medically), and tumors were amenable to an image guided procedure (ultrasound [US], computed tomography [CT] or combined US and CT).

Patients with well controlled ascites were considered eligible if all other conditions were met.

RFA was performed as an outpatient procedure.

All procedures were performed by the same team of interventional radiologists.

All procedures were performed percutaneously using local anesthesia and moderate sedation.

HCCs were treated with LeVeen™ electrodes (Boston Scientific, Natick, MA) or Cool-tip™ electrodes (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN), according to the manufacturers’ recommended protocols.

The intraprocedural monitoring was made with ultrasound for those lesions visible sonographically to ensure the hyperechoic ablation zone produced encompasses adequate tumoral margins.

For lesions that were sonographically occult, CT was applied to adequate needle positioning prior to ablation and post-ablation to ensure the ablation zone was in the appropriate location and was the appropriate size to encompass the lesion.

Following RFA treatment, patients underwent serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) measurements and contrast enhanced CT or magnetic resonance imaging at 1-month after the primary procedure and, thereafter at 3 monthly intervals for 2 years, before reverting to 6-month ultrasound if no recurrent disease was identified.

Chest CT was performed every 6 months for the first 2 years after ablation.

SECTION

Patterns of recurrence after RFA

PARAGRAPH

The primary outcome was HCC recurrence beyond Milan criteria.

This was assessed as a time-to-event variable.

All patients underwent surveillance after ablation as previously described.

HCC recurrence following RFA was defined by a new lesion on imaging, either radiologically compatible with HCC or confirmed by histology.

Recurrence was classified as local intrahepatic (when the enhancing tumor reappeared at the previous ablation zone), distant intrahepatic (a new intrahepatic HCC at a separate location to the ablation zone) or extrahepatic (HCC outside the liver).

Patients with more than one type of recurrence were classified according to the size of the greater intrahepatic tumor or as extrahepatic recurrence if an extrahepatic HCC were present.

Recurrence beyond Milan criteria was defined as recurrence with tumor size >5 cm for a single tumor, >3 cm for up to 3 tumors, more than 3 tumor deposits, macrovascular invasion, or extrahepatic disease.

Patients were classified as within or beyond Milan criteria at the time of first recurrence (i.e. at the first-time patient had recurrent HCC diagnosed after ablation).

Patients who were deemed within Milan criteria at the time of first recurrence could have undergone further ablation and recurrence beyond Milan criteria could be diagnosed at any time during the follow-up.

SECTION

Treatments of recurrence after ablation

PARAGRAPH

At the time of HCC recurrence all patients were re-presented at HCC multidisciplinary rounds.

Our general policy has been to re-ablate the intrahepatic HCC recurrence applying the same criteria we use for the primary treatment.

Otherwise, if unsuitable for repeat RFA, patients would be considered for surgery or ‘salvage’ LT based on a combined assessment of tumor stage, liver function, and comorbidities.

Other locoregional therapies such as transarterial chemoembolization would be considered if patients were not candidates for either ablation, surgery or transplantation, or used as bridging therapy to transplantation.

We recorded the first treatment that was provided after recurrence.

For those listed for transplantation at the time of recurrence, we recorded their outcome in the waiting list (i.e. whether they dropped out or were actually transplanted).

Causes of death were also recorded and classified as related to HCC progression or not.

SECTION

Statistical methods

PARAGRAPH

Statistical methods included a descriptive assessment of our cohort using mean/standard deviation for normally distributed continuous variables, median/interquartile range (IQR) for non-normally distributed continuous variables, and counts/percentages for categorical variables.

Differences between groups in terms of baseline variables and outcomes post RFA were determined using Chi-square test for categorical variables, Student’s t test for normally distributed continuous variables, and Mann-Whitney U test for non-normally distributed continuous variables.

The study’s primary outcome was time to recurrence beyond Milan criteria.

Other outcomes of interest were overall recurrence beyond Milan criteria, overall HCC recurrence, recurrence-free survival and overall survival.

Time to recurrence beyond Milan criteria was defined between the date of RFA and the date that recurrence beyond Milan criteria was diagnosed.

We took into account the competing risks between death not related to HCC and recurrence beyond Milan criteria.

Recurrence-free survival was defined between the date of ablation and the date of diagnosis of HCC recurrence or death.

To avoid cofounding disease-recurrence outcomes, patients who underwent LT as treatment for recurrent disease were censored at the date of transplant.

The recurrence beyond Milan criteria probabilities and survival probabilities were estimated by the Kaplan-Meier method and compared between groups using the log-rank test.

Univariate and multivariate Cox regression were performed to assess predictors for post-ablation recurrence beyond Milan criteria.

All variables at baseline were included in the model and the final model was selected by stepwise backward approach.

AFP levels were categorized as previously validated by Duvoux et al.13 Patients were divided into 3 categories according to their serum AFP: <100 ng/ml, 100–1,000 ng/ml and >1,000 ng/ml.

Proportional-hazard assumptions were evaluated using Schoenfeld residuals when applicable.

To assess the potential impact of tumoral differentiation in the outcome, we repeated the analysis for the subgroup of patients who had tumoral differentiation information available.

Results of these analyses are presented with hazard ratios (HR) with a 95% CI.

All statistical testing was performed in Stata 15.0 (Stata Corp., College Station, TX).

The median follow-up was 3.6 (IQR 2.1–5.5) years and 23 (7.6%) patients had less than 2-years of follow-up.

SECTION

Results

SECTION

Study population

PARAGRAPH

Between February 2000 and March 2015, a total of 635 patients with unifocal HCC smaller than 3 cm underwent RFA.

Of those, 195 patients were older than 70-years or had medical contraindications for LT at the time of ablation, 35 patients did not achieve complete response with the first RFA and 104 underwent ablation as a bridge to LT and were excluded from the study.

Of these 104 bridged patients, 93 had already been listed for LT for decompensated cirrhosis and developed an HCC while listed, and 11 patients were listed for LT for decompensated cirrhosis prior to any HCC recurrence.

The study group was therefore composed of 301 patients (Fig. 1).

The median age was 59-years old (IQR 53–64) and 221 (73.4%) patients were male.

Regarding the etiology of liver disease, 135/301 (44.9%) patients had chronic hepatitis C (HCV) and 106/301 (35.2%) had chronic hepatitis B (HBV).

The median MELD score at the time of RFA was 9 (IQR 7–11) and 261/301 (86.7%) patients were Child-Pugh class A. No patients were Child-Pugh class C.

The median tumor size at the time of RFA was 2 cm (IQR 1.6–2.5).

HCC histology at the time of RFA was available in 180/301 (59.8%) patients; 38/180 (21.1%), 134/180 (74.4%), and 8/180 (4.5%) of those patients had well, moderate, and poorly differentiated HCC, respectively.

Prior to ablation, serum AFP was available in 276/301 (91.7%) patients and the median serum AFP was 9 ng/ml (IQR 5–46).

Characteristics of the study cohort are summarized in Table 1.

SECTION

Comparison of patients with tumors ≤2 and >2 cm

PARAGRAPH

According to the tumor size at the time of the first ablation, 167/301 (55.5%) patients had an HCC ≤2 cm whereas 134/301 (44.5%) patients had an HCC >2 cm.

Patients in the ≤2 cm group were slightly younger (57.6 vs. 60.1, p = 0.01) and less likely to have had a biopsy of the tumor (50.9% vs. 70.9%, p = 0.001).

There were no statistically significant differences between patients in terms of sex, MELD, Child-Pugh score and serum AFP.

Among patients with an available biopsy, patients with HCC >2 cm had a greater proportion of moderately differentiated HCC (HCC ≤2 cm 55 [64.7%] patients vs. HCC >2 cm 79 [83.2%] patients; p = 0.012).

The baseline characteristics of the 2 groups are summarized in Table 1.

SECTION

Tumor recurrence

PARAGRAPH

HCC recurrence was diagnosed in 199/301 (66.4%) patients.

According to initial HCC diameter at the time of ablation, 105 (62.9%) patients in the HCC ≤2 cm and 94 (70.1%) patients in the in the HCC >2 cm group experienced eventual recurrence (p = 0.18).

The median recurrence-free survival was 1.98 (95% CI 1.57–2.40) years for the whole cohort.

The median recurrence-free survival was 2.5 (95% CI 1.85–3.15) years for those with HCC ≤2 cm and 1.52 (95% CI 1.24–1.81) years for those with HCC >2 cm (p = 0.01) (Fig. 2A).

The 1-, 3-, and 5-year cumulative recurrence rate was 26.9%, 53.9% and 62.9% in the HCC ≤2 cm group vs. 34.3%, 67.9% and 70.9% in the HCC >2 cm group (p <0.001).

SECTION

Patterns of HCC recurrence after ablation

PARAGRAPH

The first episode of recurrence after ablation occurred as distant intrahepatic recurrence in 139 (46.2%) patients, whereas 50 (16.6%) patients had local recurrence and 10 (3.3%) patients had extrahepatic recurrence.

The time to recurrence was 1.1 years (IQR 0.6–2.4) in those with distant intrahepatic vs. 0.9 year (IQR 0.5–1.8) in those with local recurrence, and 1.5 years (IQR 0.4–2.9) in those with extrahepatic disease (p = 0.42).

Table 2 shows the patterns of recurrence among the study groups.

PARAGRAPH

Among patients with HCV, 12 (8.9%) patients had achieved sustained virologic response (SVR) at the time of ablation.

The rate of recurrence was 8.9% for patients with HCV and SVR and 8.8% for patients with HCV without SVR (p = 0.99).

Among the 106 patients with HBV, 91 (85.8%) were suppressed at the time of ablation.

The rate of recurrence among patients with HBV and virologic suppression was 59.3% and among patients with HBV without virologic suppression was 66.7% (p = 0.59).

SECTION

Tumor recurrence beyond Milan criteria

PARAGRAPH

During follow-up, 83 (27.6%) patients had eventual recurrence beyond Milan criteria within a median time of 0.9 (IQR 0.5–1.8) years.

According to initial tumor size, 36 (21.6%) patients in the HCC ≤2 cm group and 47 (35.1%) patients in the HCC >2 cm group had recurrence beyond Milan criteria (p = 0.01).

Between the 2 initial HCC diameter groups, there were no differences regarding the specific reason for exceeding Milan criteria (number of lesions, size of lesions, vascular invasion, extrahepatic disease).

Notably, the first recurrence after ablation was already beyond Milan criteria in 38 (12.6%) patients: 15/167 (9.0%) in the HCC ≤2 cm group and 23/134 (17.2%) in the HCC >2 cm group (p = 0.03) (Fig. 2B) – this was despite post-ablation radiological surveillance.

The median time to recurrence amongst patients with first recurrence beyond Milan criteria was 1.4 (IQR 0.7–2.8) years.

These patients had regular radiological assessment that showed no recurrence until the first evidence of tumor recurrence was already beyond Milan criteria.

Table 2 summarizes patterns of recurrence after ablation.

Amongst patients who were diagnosed with recurrence beyond Milan criteria at their first recurrence, 13/38 (34.2%) patients had a size or number of tumors that exceeded criteria, 14/38 (36.8%) had macrovascular invasion and 11/38 (28.9%) had metastatic disease.

Fig. 3 provides 2 cases were recurrence occurred beyond Milan criteria.

SECTION

Treatment after recurrence

PARAGRAPH

As treatment for first HCC recurrence: 81/105 (77.1%) patients with initial HCC ≤2 cm and 60/94 (63.8%) patients with initial HCC >2 cm underwent repeat RFA, whereas LT was the treatment for first recurrence in 7/105 (6.7%) patients in the HCC ≤2 cm group and 13/94 (13.8%) patients in the HCC >2 cm group (p = 0.28).

During the entire duration of follow-up, 39/105 (37.1%) patients in the HCC ≤2 cm group and 33/94 (35.1%) patients in the HCC >2 cm group were listed for LT (p = 0.76), of whom 30/39 (76.9%) patients with HCC ≤2 cm and 18/33 (54.5%) patients with HCC >2 cm were eventually transplanted (p = 0.04).

The proportion of patients that dropped out due to tumor progression was significantly lower in the HCC ≤2 cm group than the HCC >2 cm group (9/39 [23.1%] vs. 15/33 [45.5%]; p = 0.04).

Table 3 summarizes treatments after recurrence.

SECTION

Predictors of recurrence beyond Milan criteria after ablation

PARAGRAPH

The results of univariate and multivariate analyses are shown (Table 4).

Predictors of recurrence beyond Milan criteria were tumor size >2 cm (HR 1.94; 95% CI 1.25–3.02) and AFP at the time of ablation (HR 2.05; 95% CI 1.10–3.83) for AFP 100–1,000 ng/ml.

In a sensitivity analysis of patients who had tumor biopsies, we identified that poorly differentiated HCC was associated with an increased risk of recurrence beyond Milan criteria (HR 4.45; 95% CI 1.20–16.61) (Table S1).

SECTION

Overall survival

PARAGRAPH

Median survival after ablation for the entire cohort was 7.8 years.

The survival probabilities according to tumor size are shown (Fig. 4).

The 1-, 3- and 5-years actuarial survival rates after ablation were 98.2%, 86.2% and 79.0% in the HCC ≤2 cm group vs. 93.3%, 77.6% and 70.9% in the HCC >2 cm group (p = 0.01).

HCC progression was the cause of death in 75/301 patients (24.9%) (35/167 [21.0%] patients in the HCC ≤2 cm group and 40/134 [29.9%] in the HCC >2 cm group; p = 0.08).

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

There are conflicting data on the best management for patients with early stage HCC who are otherwise candidates for transplant.

In this study, small HCC treated with RFA in patients who would have also been transplant candidates had a 66% recurrence rate.

Of these recurrences, 42% exceeded the Milan criteria disqualifying them from a curative treatment option in jurisdictions that limit transplantation to the Milan criteria.

In contrast, if the patients with early stage HCC in this study had been treated with LT instead of RFA we would have expected a 5-year survival rate of ∼75–80% and a 5-year recurrence rate of <15%.14

Risk factors for recurrences beyond the Milan criteria after RFA included tumors >2 cm, and a serum AFP >100 ng/ml.

PARAGRAPH

The association between higher recurrence rates after RFA and larger tumor size and higher AFP levels has been previously documented.

Tsuchiya et al. performed a retrospective study of 323 patients with HCC within Milan criteria (including patients with multifocal and larger tumors) that received first-line RFA9 and identified an AFP level >100 ng/ml and tumor size >2 cm as risk factors for recurrence outside Milan criteria.

Cho et al. included 438 patients with unifocal HCC <3 cm who received first-line RFA.15

Variables associated with initial recurrence beyond Milan criteria included tumor size >2 cm and tumor location adjacent to the colon, presumably due to technical limitations of RFA.

None of these studies specifically examined these risk factors in the select population of potentially transplantable patients who were the subjects of the present study.

We identified a local recurrence rate of 13.2% in patients with HCC ≤2 cm in accordance with other retrospective studies,16,17 but slightly higher than reported in clinical trials.18,19

The probable explanation for this higher incidence when compared to clinical trials is the ‘real-world’ nature of our data.

PARAGRAPH

Survival differences after RFA related to initial HCC size have also been previously reported.

Kutlu et al. demonstrated that patients with tumors >3 cm have impaired survival after RFA when compared to surgery and transplantation.20

However, in contrast with the present study, survival differences between patients with HCC ≤2 cm and >2 cm diameter were not significant.

However, the Kutlu et al. study did not perform an intention-to-treat comparison, made no distinction regarding transplant candidacy of included patients at baseline, and had limited data regarding severity of liver disease, or of recurrence outcomes.

In our study, the 5-year overall survival of patients with tumors >2 cm was 71%.

However, recurrence was almost universal.

Patients with tumors >2 cm had a higher recurrence rate beyond Milan when compared to those with tumors <2 cm.

PARAGRAPH

This study shows that up to 2/3 of transplantable patients with HCC ≤3 cm treated with ablation as first-line therapy, will recur.

The most common location of recurrence was intrahepatic and distant to the initial ablation site; this is not surprising, given that a past history of HCC is a well-known risk factor for new lesions.21

New ablation techniques continue to be developed and utilized, including multi-bipolar22 and microwave ablation.23

Since the majority of our recurrences beyond Milan criteria were not local, we speculate that these newer techniques may not reduce recurrence rates although this question certainly merits further study.

PARAGRAPH

It has been speculated that new direct acting antivirals against HCV may affect HCC recurrence rate after RFA for HCCs.24

In the present study, we did not find an impact of SVR on the recurrence rate among patients with HCC treated with RFA but these agents only became available in Ontario in 2014, towards the end of the interval reviewed in this study.

The impact of SVR on HCC recurrence after RFA remains unresolved and requires further study.

PARAGRAPH

The treatment of recurrent HCC after first-line therapy with ablation is also not standardized.

Re-ablation, liver resection and LT are valid options.25

Because of the organ supply, many centers utilize further locoregional therapies for recurrence, with salvage transplant considered on a case-by-case basis.26

However, there is data suggesting that higher survival rates can be achieved with salvage transplantation than with resection or re-ablation for HCC recurrence.27,28

Most of these studies do not take into account the LT waiting list dropout rate which was 33% in our series, higher than previous reports.29–31

Dropout rates are likely higher at our center because of our practice to list patients for LT with tumors beyond the Milan criteria, a group with a higher risk of dropout.32

Importantly, the dropout rate was higher for those patients with initial tumors >2 cm when compared to smaller tumors.

PARAGRAPH

A limitation of this study is the retrospective, observational study design.

However, in the current era it would be very challenging to undertake a prospective, randomized trial of different management strategies for very early/early stage HCC.

We did not assess the impact of multi-bipolar ablation, combined therapies for HCC recurrence (e.g. RFA and TACE) or emerging therapies such as radioembolization.

We do not believe this to be a significant limitation since RFA remains the most commonly used treatment for early HCC in unresectable patients.5,33

Strengths of this study include the intention-to-treat and competing risks analysis (thereby more accurately reflecting real-world outcomes) and an outcome measure (recurrence within Milan criteria) that is relevant to most LT centers worldwide.

PARAGRAPH

In summary, our study suggests that transplantation rather than ablation may offer patients with >2 cm tumors or serum AFP >100 ng/ml the best chance of cure.

In regions where it is impossible to offer LT as the initial treatment to patients with these risk factors, they should be considered for enhanced post-treatment surveillance after RFA with prompt referral for LT whenever there are worrisome findings.

The ideal surveillance protocol for patients with high-risk of post-ablation recurrence is still unknown and should be the aim of future investigation.

PARAGRAPH

RFA as first-line therapy for HCC ≤3 cm provides excellent short- to medium-term survival rates.

However, recurrent or new tumors develop in more than 2/3 of these patients.

We identified risks factors for developing recurrence beyond Milan criteria including AFP level and tumor size >2 cm.

This analysis suggests that patients at higher risk of recurrence beyond Milan criteria should be considered for LT earlier in their treatment pathway, ideally after their first HCC recurrence.

SECTION

Financial support

PARAGRAPH

The authors received no financial support to produce this manuscript.

SECTION

Conflicts of interest

PARAGRAPH

The authors declare no conflicts of interest that pertain to this work.

PARAGRAPH

Please refer to the accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.

SECTION

Authors’ contributions

PARAGRAPH

AD, AG and GS contributed to study design, data collection and analysis, drafted the manuscript and approved the final version.

HM, ADA, AI, OM and WZ contributed to data collection and approved the manuscript’s final version.

JK, RB, SPC, AG, PDG, IDM, MS, MSC, DRG, LBL, NS, ELR and MS contributed for the data analysis and interpretation, critical appraisal of the and approved the final version.