10.1016/j.jhep.2018.10.006

ABSTRACT

TITLE

NK-cell responses are biased towards CD16-mediated effector functions in chronic hepatitis B virus infection

PARAGRAPH

Phenotypic and functional natural killer (NK)-cell alterations are well described in chronic hepatitis B virus (cHBV) infection.

However, it is largely unknown whether these alterations result from general effects on the overall NK-cell population or the emergence of distinct NK-cell subsets.

Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is common in cHBV and is associated with the emergence of memory-like NK cells.

We aimed to assess the impact of these cells on cHBV infection.

PARAGRAPH

To assess the impact of memory-like NK cells on phenotypic and functional alterations in cHBV infection, we performed in-depth analyses of circulating NK cells in 52 patients with cHBV, 45 with chronic hepatitis C virus infection and 50 healthy donors, with respect to their HCMV serostatus.

PARAGRAPH

In patients with cHBV/HCMV+, FcεRIγ- memory-like NK cells were present in higher frequencies and with higher prevalence than in healthy donors with HCMV+.

This pronounced HCMV-associated memory-like NK-cell expansion could be identified as key determinant of the NK-cell response in cHBV infection.

Furthermore, we observed that memory-like NK cells consist of epigenetically distinct subsets and exhibit key metabolic characteristics of long-living cells.

Despite ongoing chronic infection, the phenotype of memory-like NK cells was conserved in patients with cHBV/HCMV+.

Functional characteristics of memory-like NK cells also remained largely unaffected by cHBV infection with the exception of an increased degranulation capacity in response to CD16 stimulation that was, however, detectable in both memory-like and conventional NK cells.

PARAGRAPH

The emergence of HCMV-associated memory-like NK cells shapes the overall NK-cell response in cHBV infection and contributes to a general shift towards CD16-mediated effector functions.

Therefore, HCMV coinfection needs to be considered in the design of immunotherapeutic approaches that target NK cells in cHBV.

