10.1016/j.jhep.2019.04.010

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Efficient long-term amplification of hepatitis B virus isolates after infection of slow proliferating HepG2-NTCP cells

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Despite vaccination, chronic hepatitis B (CHB) has remained among the most widespread, life-shortening infectious diseases.

Two billion people worldwide have been infected with the hepatitis B virus (HBV), including 257 million chronic carriers.

Up to 30% of chronically HBV-infected adults will develop liver cirrhosis or hepatocellular carcinoma, accounting for 887,000 deaths annually.1

Reverse transcriptase inhibitors and interferon-alpha can control viral replication and prevent CHB progression.

However, these therapies do not act on HBV genomes in host cell nuclei that persist as covalently closed circular DNA (cccDNA).

Thus, current treatment regimens are not curative, requiring lifelong therapy.

PARAGRAPH

HBV has a restricted host range and a narrow tissue tropism which has hampered the study of the HBV life cycle and the discovery of new therapeutic approaches.

Only highly differentiated hepatocyte-derived cells from human or tree shrew (Tupaia) can be used for in vitro HBV infection studies.

Hepatocytes derived from common laboratory animals like mice, rats, dogs, macaques or pigs do not support HBV infection.2,3

The current gold standard for in vitro infection studies utilizes primary human hepatocytes (PHHs) and patient-derived HBV.

However, PHH drawbacks include high cost, limited availability, difficult handling, donor variability, and dedifferentiation leading to rapid loss of HBV susceptibility and replication.4

The hepatoma HepaRG cell line requires laborious re-differentiation that results in only moderate HBV susceptibility.5

Novel models, i.e. self-assembling co-cultures (SACC) of PHHs with non-parenchymal liver cells, as well as a 3D microfluidic PHH system, can support persistent infection with cell culture and purified patient-derived HBV strains for 5-6 weeks, but no amplification and spread of HBV has been observed to date, and both models depend on human liver tissue.6,7

Other promising systems are human hepatocyte-like cells (HLC) generated from induced pluripotent stem cells or embryonic stem cells which are susceptible to HBV and support limited viral production and spread.8,9

PARAGRAPH

A major breakthrough was the discovery of the sodium-taurocholate cotransporting polypeptide (NTCP) as the differentiation-dependent, hepatocyte- and species-specific cell membrane HBV receptor.10

Although hepatoma cell lines, such as HepG2 and Huh-7, replicate HBV after transfection with HBV DNA, they are not susceptible to HBV infection.

However, they can be rendered susceptible by NTCP overexpression.

Efficient infection of these and other cells requires treatment with polyethylene glycol (PEG) during HBV attachment and/or entry to enhance glycosaminoglycan-dependent binding.11

Dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) is used to slow down cell proliferation, extend lifespan, increase differentiation status, and enhance susceptibility and HBV replication.

However, following HBV infection and episomal cccDNA formation, these cells fail to amplify the viral genomes, hampering viral progeny production, and spread in cell culture.

PARAGRAPH

HBV-transfected hepatoma cells, including HepAD38 and HepG2.2.15, have been used to produce cell culture-derived HBV (HBVcc) and to investigate late stages of the viral life cycle.

Less laborious and expensive in vitro infection systems with an unlimited supply that support the complete HBV life cycle and more closely resemble hepatocytes in the human liver, by allowing for more efficient amplification and spread of viral progeny, would be highly desirable (reviewed in 12).

In this study, we identify and characterize a slowly proliferating HepG2-NTCP clone that supports the efficient secretion of highly infectious HBV progeny upon infection with patient- and cell culture-derived virus, and elucidate the kinetics and routes of viral amplification during long-term infection.

SECTION

Materials and methods

SECTION

HBV infection and progeny passaging

PARAGRAPH

First HBV passage (p1): HepG2-NTCPsec+ were incubated in 384-well plates (8,000 cells/well) for 18 h in infection medium.

p1-cells were inoculated at 37 °C for 24 h with HepAD38-cell-harvested HBVcc genotype D (2,500 genome equivalents [GEq]/cell, 5 × 108 GEq/ml) or with diluted crude sera from 7 Korean patients with CHB, unless otherwise indicated, with 4% PEG8000.

For inhibition of HBV infection, cells were treated with inhibitors 2 h before and during inoculation.

Following inoculum removal and washing, cells were incubated for 120 h in infection medium with or without reference inhibitors.

Naïve HepG2-NTCPsec+ p2-cells were seeded in infection medium into 384-well plates 24 h before inoculation.

For p2-cell infection, supernatants of HBVcc-infected p1-cells were transferred to p2-cells at 6 days post-infection (dpi) in the presence of 4% PEG.

After 24 h, cells were washed and incubated with fresh medium for 120 h.

PARAGRAPH

For further details regarding the materials and methods used, please refer to the CTAT table and supplementary information.

SECTION

Results

SECTION

Infectious HBV progeny production in slowly proliferating HepG2-NTCP cells

PARAGRAPH

Our goal was to identify an HBV-susceptible HepG2-NTCP clone with enhanced production of infectious HBV progeny.

We subjected a previously described HepG2-NTCP cell clone (parental clone) to reselection for NTCP overexpression by increasing the blasticidin selection pressure (15 µg/ml) for 6 weeks.13

Five new HepG2-NTCP clones were selected and HBV susceptibility tested (Fig. 1A).

The parental cell clone and another published HepG2-NTCP reference clone (sec−), were used as controls.14

Beside clone #3, all clones showed detectable NTCP expression and similar levels of myrcludex B (MyrB)-sensitive HBV susceptibility (Fig. 1B).

To test the production of infectious HBV progeny by the different clones, we infected p1 cells with serially diluted HBV and passaged the supernatants to naïve p2 cells for infection (Fig. 1C).

Depending on the inoculum size, p1 infection rates varied between ∼10–90% (Fig. 1D, upper panel).

Clone #5 was superior in the secretion of infectious viral progeny and was therefore named HepG2-NTCPsec+ (Fig. 1D, lower panel).

Only viral progeny secreted from the HepG2-NTCPsec+ infected up to 50% of p2 cells while all other clones showed lower abilities in HBV secretion.

Lamivudine (LMV), an HBV replication inhibitor, abrogated the infectivity of the p1 supernatant for p2 cells, demonstrating that the p2 cell infection was caused by secreted progeny virions and not by carryover of input virus (Fig. 1E).

PARAGRAPH

Notably, the NTCP expression level in HepG2-NTCPsec− is 2-fold higher than in sec+ as determined by quantification of immunofluorescence images, leading to increased taurocholic acid uptake and binding capacity for HBV as shown by a 2–10-fold elevated plasma membrane accumulation of myr-preS1-Alexa633 peptide in live-cell imaging and FACS analysis (Fig. S1A-D).

Comparing cell doubling times (t2) identified HepG2-NTCPsec+ with a 2-fold reduced growth rate (t2 = 13.1 days) relative to that of HepG2-NTCPsec− with a typical t2 of 6.7 days (Fig. S2A).

Slow-growing HepG2-NTCPsec+ were larger and less numerous upon cell confluency (Fig. S2B), with a significantly larger fraction of cells within the non-dividing G0/G1 cell cycle phase (Fig. S2C).

DMSO extended the HepG2-NTCPsec+ lifespan, enabling long-term culture for up to 8 weeks without a significant decrease in cell numbers and metabolic activity as shown by robust ATP levels (Fig. S2D).

To test whether HBV progeny production in HepG2-NTCP cells depends on the cell cycle, we knocked down CDK6, which regulates the G1/S phase progression (Fig. S2E).

After confirming a 70% reduction of CDK6 mRNA level, HepG2-NTCP cells showed markedly decreased proliferation, a minor increase in the number of de novo infected cells, and significantly increased production of infectious HBV progeny (Fig. S2F).

SECTION

Characterization of HepG2-NTCPsec+ derived HBV progeny

PARAGRAPH

Next, we compared the secretion of HBV over 4 weeks after inoculation of HepG2-NTCPsec− and sec+ with a high-dose of HBVcc (5,000 GEq/cell or 8 × 108 GEq/ml).

As a marker of infection, HBV core antigen (HBcAg) was expressed robustly for 4 weeks in > 90% of cells in both clones (Fig. 2A).

However, at 4 weeks post infection (wpi), HepG2-NTCPsec− secreted 3-fold lower HBV e antigen (HBeAg) and 16-fold less HBV surface antigen (HBsAg) (Fig. 2B).

Also, HBV DNA levels secreted by HepG2-NTCPsec− did not reach the DNA input level whereas HepG2-NTCPsec+ secreted higher numbers of HBV DNA, which demonstrated net amplification of viral genomes (Fig. 2B).

We compared secretion of HBV genomes in PHH at 11 and 15 dpi, before the signal vanished at 20 dpi (Fig. S3A).

Compared to HepG2-NTCPsec+, we determined a similar daily secretion rate of HBV genomes and HBeAg, but a 4-fold lower production of small HBV surface protein (SHBs) per infected cell by PHH (Fig. S3B).

Similar to HepG2-NTCPsec−, parental HepG2-NTCP cells and other clones showed lower secretion levels of all viral markers (Fig. S3C).

PARAGRAPH

The structure of secreted HBV-related particles was analyzed by native western blotting using anti-HBc or anti-preS1 antibodies, which recognize the large HBV surface antigen (LHBsAg).

HepG2-NTCPsec− produced low levels of LHBs-enveloped HBcAg capsids (Fig. 2C).

In contrast, HepG2-NTCPsec+ secreted increasing high levels of enveloped viral particles (Fig. 2C).

Accordingly, infectivity of the supernatants increased over time (Fig. S4).

HBV-transfected producer cells HepAD38 secreted 10-fold more non-infectious “naked” capsids than LHBs-enveloped virions (Fig. 2C).

Accordingly, HepG2-NTCPsec+ inocula were more infectious than those of HepAD38 cells (Fig. 2E).

In contrast to HBV-infected HepG2-NTCPsec− and transfected HepAD38 cells, HepG2-NTCPsec+ secreted >100-fold more LHBs-enveloped HBV particles and no detectable naked capsids.

Similarly, the serum from a highly contagious patient with CHB contained high levels of enveloped HBV capsids and no naked capsids (Fig. 2D).

The serum also contained slowly migrating and faster-migrating LHBs containing particles without capsids which were absent in the sec+ samples.

However, Dane particles of 45 nm in diameter, as well as 23 nm spherical and filamentous subviral particles of heterogeneous length were produced by infected HepG2-NTCPsec+ as visualized by negative-staining electron microscopy (Fig. 2F).

SECTION

Comparative transcriptomics of HepG2-NTCPsec+ and HepG2-NTCPsec−

PARAGRAPH

In search for cellular factors which could explain the marked differences in HBV progeny secretion between HepG2-NTCPsec+ and sec−, we conducted a comparative transcriptomic analysis in the presence and absence of HBV (Fig. 3A).

Strikingly, using stringent parameters of p value < 0.01 and q-value < 0.05 for the analysis of triplicates, no gene transcripts were uniformly induced or repressed by HBV infection of HepG2-NTCPsec+ compared to naïve sec+, just as shown for chimpanzees during the lag phase of HBV infection (weeks 0–2) or the phase of logarithmic expansion (weeks 4–6) (Fig. 3A, left).15

However, in HepG2-NTCPsec− that fail to produce infectious progeny virions, 1,364 genes were changed due to HBV infection (689 upregulated, 675 downregulated) (Fig. 3A, right).

Comparing the total transcriptome comprising 18,149 genes, 5,494 genes were significantly differentially expressed between HBV-infected HepG2-NTCPsec+ and sec− (2,755 upregulated and 2,793 downregulated in sec+) (Fig. 3B) including host factors related to HBV entry, transcription, assembly and release.

PARAGRAPH

As already demonstrated at the protein level (Fig. S1), NTCP (SLC10A1) RNA levels were ∼2-fold higher in HepG2-NTCPsec− (Fig. 3C).

Furthermore, most genes related to HBV attachment, e.g. heparan sulfate proteoglycan (HSPG), AGRN, glypicans (GPC) and syndecan 4 (SDC) were more highly expressed in HepG2-NTCPsec− (Fig. 3C).

Among 11 previously described HBV transcription factors, CEBPA, FXR, PPARA, PPARGC1A/B and PPARG were 2- to 100-fold upregulated while only HNF1B was 5-fold downregulated in sec+ compared to sec− using stringent parameters of p value <0.01 and q-value <0.05 for the analysis of triplicates (Fig. 3D).

Furthermore, DDX3X and DDX3Y, 2 cellular RNA helicases with known inhibitory effects on HBV replication, were 6- and 2-fold higher expressed in HepG2-NTCPsec−, respectively (Fig. S5).

However, HBV restriction host factor APOBEC3G was 4-fold higher expressed in sec+.

Genes related to the preS1-dependent virion envelopment as well as ESCRT0 complex were mainly upregulated in sec+, while the ESCRT I, II, III secretory complexes which are hijacked by HBV for egress, show a more heterogeneous expression pattern (Fig. S5).

SECTION

Secretion of infectious progeny drives spread, re-infection, cccDNA replenishment, and HBV amplification in HepG2-NTCPsec+

PARAGRAPH

Considering the high susceptibility and efficient infectious progeny secretion from HepG2-NTCPsec+, we followed HBV spread in long-term (6-week) cultures (Fig. 4A).

Inoculation with 500 GEq/cell resulted in an initial infection rate of ∼30% at 1 wpi, followed by a steady increase, plateauing at 80% by 4–5 wpi (Fig. 4B).

LMV suppressed this increase, indicating the spread of newly produced viral progeny and ruling out delayed de novo infection by residual input HBV.

Viral spread was abrogated by neutralizing anti-HBs antibodies, indicating that HBV spreads via the release of enveloped viral progeny into the extracellular space.

Moreover, HBV spread was also efficiently inhibited in the presence of heparin, MyrB, or anti-preS1 antibodies in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. 4C), indicating that like HBV entry during inoculation with exogenous virus, the HBV S- and preS1 domain as well as cellular HSPG and NTCP are crucial entry factors for spread.

PARAGRAPH

HBV spread correlated with accumulation of intracellular cccDNA (Fig. 4D).

As cccDNA is the template for pregenomic RNA (pgRNA) which is converted into the relaxed circular DNA (rcDNA) present in mature nucleocapsids and infectious HBV, intracellular rcDNA synthesis also increased over time (Fig. 4D).

New cccDNA is, in turn, generated from rcDNA reimported into the nucleus via recycling of de novo synthesized cytoplasmic nucleocapsids or via receptor-mediated entry of released virions.

LMV, which blocks reverse transcription of pgRNA into rcDNA, prevented cccDNA replenishment via both pathways (Fig. 4D).

Anti-HBs treatment reduced, rather than abrogated, rcDNA synthesis by preventing viral spread.

However, in quantitative PCR (qPCR) we confirmed that entry inhibitors suppressed cccDNA formation, suggesting that new cccDNA is predominantly derived from de novo infection, rather than from recycling of intracellular nucleocapsids (Fig. 4E).

We estimated that entry-dependent, extracellular routes account for 88% of HBV genome amplification, with intracellular pathways accounting for no more than 12% of cccDNA replenishment.

Secretion of viral genomes similarly increased over time, a trend blocked by anti-HBs and LMV (Fig. 4F).

Total rebound of HBV progeny secretion occurred 1–2 weeks after LMV withdrawal (Fig. S4).

PARAGRAPH

At later time points, when de novo infection by spread to naïve cells became undetectable, cccDNA and secreted viral genomes continued accumulating, which was prevented by entry and replication inhibitors.

Using values of total cell number, the percentage of infected cells and the total number of cccDNA molecules obtained from qPCR (Fig. 4E), we calculated that the number of cccDNA molecules per infected cell was increasing constantly from ∼1–8 within 6 weeks.

In line with this, inoculation of sec+ with a high virus load and maintaining the cells with a constantly high infection rate of 80–90% over 8 weeks (Fig. S6A) showed a weekly increase of secreted HBV DNA, HBsAg and HBeAg levels over the entire assay period (Fig. S6B).

The increase was blocked by replication or entry inhibitors when added to the cells at 2 dpi, indicating that re-infection of already infected cells substantially contributes to HBV amplification.

Long-term treatment with the inhibitors had no significant impact on cell viability (Fig. S6C).

SECTION

HBV progeny spreads preferably to adjacent cells

PARAGRAPH

The spatio-temporal pattern of HBV spread in infected cell cultures (Fig. 5A) was followed by whole-well imaging of HBcAg-positive cells using dedicated image mining software (Fig. S7A).

Evaluation of distance between infected cells revealed the formation of HBV-positive cell clusters (Fig. S7B).

The HBV-infected clusters expanded over time, while entry inhibitors MyrB and anti-HBs prevented the formation of larger clusters (Fig. 5B).

Mock-treated infected single cells rapidly expanded to >50% of infected cells within clusters of >10 infected cells/cluster at 4 wpi, whereas inhibitor treatment significantly reduced the formation of larger cluster sizes (Fig. 5C).

PARAGRAPH

To further visualize HBV spread on a single-cell level, infected HepG2-NTCPsec+ were co-cultured for 1 week with naïve HepG2-NTCPsec+ expressing the red fluorescent protein (Fig. 5D).

Infected reporter cells were predominantly observed adjacent to de novo HBV-infected cells, indicating that virus transmission followed a cell-to-cell route (Fig. 5E).

MyrB and LMV reduced HBV spread to reporter cells by ∼6-fold (Fig. 5F-G).

SECTION

HBV in sera of patients with CHB persistently amplifies and spreads in HepG2-NTCPsec+

PARAGRAPH

As HepG2-NTCPsec+ supported propagation of HBVcc, we further tested whether these cells support the propagation of patient-derived HBV (HBVpt).

We inoculated sec+ with 0.1–20 µl of crude patient sera from 7 Korean patients with CHB and differences in viral load and HBeAg status (Fig. 6A).

As determined by immunofluorescence of HBc expression (Fig. 6B), at 1 wpi, 4 out of 7 sera were found to be clearly infectious with >2× the cut-off of 1% infected cells and infection rates proportional to the inoculum concentration in GEq/cell (Fig. 6C).

Serum from patient #1 and #2, bearing the highest viral loads, resulted in 47% and 56% infected cells within 1 week, respectively, when inoculated with 5 µl serum, equivalent to 3,400 and 900 GEq/cell (Fig. 6C).

Sporadic, single infected cells were detected using a minimum of 2 GEq/cell of HBVpt #6.

The negative results for patients #4 and #5, the positive result of patient #6 and the endpoint dilution enables the definition of a minimum infectious dose, suggesting that the detection limit for infectious virions in serum at 1 wpi is 2 × 107 to 3 × 108 GEq/ml.

However, serum of patient #7 caused no detectable infection within 1 week despite a relatively high viral load of 4 × 108 GEq/ml (up to 800 GEq/cell).

PARAGRAPH

Expanding the assay duration, we detected delayed infection for the initially negative sera #4, #5, #7 with 2, 16 and 5% HBV-positive cells at 8 wpi (Table 1).

We monitored secreted viral structural antigens, and viral genomes over 8 weeks via ELISA and qPCR.

Due to the high input virus inoculum, HBV genomes and HBsAg decreased during the first weeks, before viral markers increased at later assay time points in most cases of HBVpt infections.

The earliest time point of inflection of viral genomes was determined at 1 wpi for patient #2 and at 3 wpi for patients #3, #5, and #6.

Due to the relatively lower sensitivity of ELISA, HBsAg inflection was detectable 1–3 weeks later.

The weekly increasing secretion rate reached between 6 × 103–5 × 108 GEq/ml and <0.1 to up to 316 ng/ml HBsAg at 7 or 8 wpi, paralleled by the expansion of HBV-infected cells by viral spread.

Differences in the secretion capacity correlated clearly with the range of infection rates between 3–78%.

For HBVcc genotype D and B, the time point of inflection was reached at 1 and 3 wpi, respectively.

Taken together, the larger inocula of HBVpt genotype C infected cells and replicated as efficiently as HBVcc with genotype D or B. On average, for genotypes D, C and B, 7 × 107, 3.6 × 105 and 6.5 × 106 HBV genomes per ng of SHBs were secreted weekly during the last 3 weeks, respectively, indicating a 200- and 10-fold higher ratio of secreted genomes per SHBs for genotype D HBVcc.

PARAGRAPH

To evaluate the HBV patient strain-specific antiviral treatment sensitivity, HepG2-NTPCsec+ were inoculated with 0.6 µl (400 GEq/cell, 3 × 107 GEq/ml) serum of patient #1, the 2-fold minimal infectious dose (Fig. 7A), resulting in a low initial infection rate.

Until 3 wpi, only minor secretion of HBVpt genomes and clearance of input HBsAg were observed (Fig. 7B).

At 4 wpi, HBVpt genome and HBsAg secretion increased significantly with a 50-fold net amplification of accumulated secreted viral genomes until 8 wpi relative to input (1.6 × 109 GEq/ml).

HBcAg staining revealed that amplification of secreted viral markers was paralleled by de novo infection of naïve cells increasing from 9% up to 70% within 8 weeks (Fig. 7C).

Anti-HBs antibody, anti-preS1 antibody MA18/7 (data not shown), and MyrB blocked both amplification of secreted viral markers and de novo infection by HBV progeny (Fig. 7B-C).

Inhibition by LMV underscored that newly produced viral progeny caused the increase in de novo infected cells.

During the ramp-up phase of the viral spread between 3–7 wpi, secreted HBV genomes amplified with a markedly shorter t2 (5.9 days) relative to t2 in de novo infected cells (14.2 days).

Consequently, the number of secreted HBV genomes per infected cell per day increased nearly 5-fold between 3 and 8 wpi (Fig. 7D).

PARAGRAPH

Side-by-side, we infected with genotype D HBVcc using 60 GEq/cell (0.01 µl, 1 × 107 GEq/ml) for inoculation (Fig. S8).

At 1 wpi, HBVcc genome and HBsAg secretion increased significantly with a 1,300-fold net amplification of accumulated viral genomes relative to input until 8 wpi (1.3 × 1010 GEq/ml) (Fig. S8A).

Calculated t2, as well as the antiviral effect via inhibitor treatment were comparable between the 2 different virus sources and genotypes.

Furthermore, a partial viral rebound after MyrB and LMV discontinuation during the last 4 weeks were observed for both viruses.

However, a partial rebound after anti-HBs withdrawal was only detectable in genotype D HBVcc-infected cells (Fig. S8A-C).

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

Many viruses can be directly isolated from patients for propagation and passaging in cell culture and amplification of viral progeny.

Such in vitro approaches allow for the selective isolation of infectious strains within the viral quasispecies pool and the analysis of strain-specific features, like replication efficiency and treatment sensitivity.

Up to date, humanized mice are used for efficient amplification of infectious patient- or cell culture-derived HBV (reviewed in 12).

Cell culture systems for in vitro HBV infection do not support the efficient secretion and amplification of progeny virus.

PHHs are capable of secreting HBV efficiently with published values of up to 150 IU/ml SHBs and 2 × 107 GEq/ml (Table S1), but are too fragile in handling, limited in susceptibility and expensive.

For HepaRG as well as HepG2-NTCP cells, lower values of 16 and 14 IU/ml SHBs and ∼1 × 106 GEq/ml are reported.

The maximum weekly secretion capacity of HepG2-NTCPsec+ reaches 253 IU/ml SHBs and up to 1 × 1010 GEq/ml, 2–20-fold and 500–10,000-fold more SHBs and HBV genomes compared to published values of PHH, HepaRG and other HepG2-NTCP cells infected with HBVcc genotype D.

PARAGRAPH

To our knowledge, we developed the first continuous cell line capable of 1-step net amplification of infectious HBV.

Decelerated cell proliferation, extended lifespan, increased G1/S cell ratio, balanced expression of NTCP and HSPG, high expression of HBV-related transcription factors and low expression of HBV restrictive factor DDX3 contribute to increased production of infectious HBV progeny in HepG2-NTCPsec+.

Our results confirm previous reports showing that cellular factors restricting HBV replication are linked to the differentiation status of hepatocytes during an extended G1 phase and a prolonged cell cycle.16

In HBV-transfected HepG2 cells, the formation of cccDNA and release of infectious viral progeny can be upregulated by G1 arrest.17

PARAGRAPH

Furthermore, our results indicated that HBsAg envelopment and infectious HBV particle egress are cell-type-dependent.

Supernatants of HBV-transfected HepAD38 cells harbored predominantly defective naked capsids, which were reported to exit stable HBV-transfected cells via an alternative secretion pathway compared to virions.18

In contrast, infected HepG2-NTCPsec+ released high levels of LHBs-enveloped virions but no detectable naked capsids.

An excess of secreted naked capsids is likely an aberrant product of transfected hepatoma cells where HBV replication is driven by chromosomally integrated HBV DNA, exhibiting epigenetic regulation distinct from that of viral replication driven by episomal cccDNA in infected cells.

Naked capsids were also absent in the serum of patient #1.

However, high levels of RNA-containing naked capsids were reported to be present in the blood of reverse transcription-inhibitor treated patients.19

Whether the presence of naked capsids in the blood of some untreated patients is a product of an HBV secretion pathway or originates from damaged liver cells, remains controversial, as a recent study reported an association between circulating HBV RNA and serum alanine aminotransferase level.20

PARAGRAPH

Considering the overall hepatocyte abundance in the liver and the low virus doses subjected to most common host-to-host transmission (i.e. sexual or percutaneous), infection begins with only a few infected cells and undetectably low viremia before the virus spreads through the liver within weeks or months, resulting in the establishment of acute HBV infection.21

Restricted lifespans of cell cultures, generally not exceeding 3–4 weeks, have hampered in vitro investigations of late-phase kinetics of acute HBV infections.

To mimic HBV amplification during acute infection establishment in the host, at least partially, we devised conditions for long-term infection experiments, including culturing of HepG2NTCPsec+ in 384-well plates with 2.5% DMSO and weekly medium exchanges.

The 2 phases of viral amplification kinetics observed here may correlate with the so-called diagnostic window in patients with HBV: the virus is initially undetectable in the blood and increases exponentially during the subsequent viraemic ramp-up phase.

With a mean t2 of 5.9 and 6.5 days for genotype C HBVpt and genotype D HBVcc, respectively, HepG2-NTCPsec+ amplified both viruses with nearly identical kinetics during the ramp-up phase (3–7 wpi).

In contrast, the ramp-up phase in acutely infected patients exhibits an estimated t2 of 2.2 to 5.8 days.22

Inoculation of humanized uPA/SCID mice with higher viral loads accelerates the onset of the ramp-up phase to 1–2 wpi.23

Here, the effect of viral dose on infection kinetics was confirmed, with high-titer inocula similarly promoting earlier onset of the viraemic ramp-up phase (1–2 wpi) in HepG2-NTCPsec+.

PARAGRAPH

For 3 virus preparations, HBsAg and HBV DNA titer positively correlated in the supernatant of infected cells.

However, relative to HepG2-NTCPsec+ infected with genotype B and D HBVcc, those infected with genotype C HBVpt produced more SHBs and LHBs-enveloped subviral particles per capsid (Fig. S9), but less HBV genomes, suggesting genotype-specific secretion patterns.

In fact, the cells secrete 200- and 10-fold more genomes per SHBs when infected with genotype D HBVcc.

Under the conditions tested, we observed max.

1,300- and 36,000-fold HBV genome and HBsAg amplification of genotype D HBVcc, respectively.

With max.

50-fold, the genotype C HBVpt genome net amplification is significantly reduced which is due to the low infectivity of unpurified, crude patient serum as shown by the high minimum infectious dose of 2 × 107 GEq/ml needed for infection.

Several factors may explain why our system is not as susceptible as shown for the chimpanzee model infected with inocula from patients in the pre-acute phase of infection.24

Here, sera were collected from patients with CHB who are known to have a large proportion of non-infectious virus particles, e.g. antibody-neutralized virions, or preS1-rich filamentous subviral particles potentially competing with virions for the low-abundance preS1 receptor.

Even the amplification potential for HBsAg cannot be calculated due to very high concentrations of subviral particles present in the serum of patients with CHB.

However, the infection efficacy and net amplification may be further increased by purifying HBV, as preS1-containing subviral particles and virion-antibody complexes can be partially removed.

PARAGRAPH

Mechanisms of HBV progeny amplification during the establishment of acute infection have remained poorly understood due to the lack of suitable cell culture models.

However, we showed that the viraemic ramp-up phase was paralleled by de novo infection of naïve cells, indicating that viral spread contributed to amplification of HBV progeny.

Spread was blocked by well described HBV entry inhibitors, reflecting interactions between viral surface proteins and cell membrane receptors (HSPGs and NTCP) as a restrictive step in HBV spread.

Thus, spreading virions seem to utilize an identical entry mechanism to exogenously added virions during inoculation.

However, more studies on HepG2-NTCPsec+ are needed to identify further cellular factors driving HBV spread.

PARAGRAPH

In all HBV-susceptible cell culture models, efficient infection is strictly dependent on PEG during inoculation.

PEG is required for the interaction of viral surface proteins with HSPG for HBV entry.11

Recent reports have demonstrated that ∼15% spread was achievable in a HepG2-NTCP cell line only under continuous PEG treatment.25

However, HBV spread in HepG2-NTCPsec+ from <10–80% infection rates in the absence of PEG, with PEG supplementation not affecting spread (Fig. S10B), indicating that progeny virions released by HepG2-NTCPsec+ can interact with HSPG for viral entry independently of PEG.

We were unable to detect PEG-dependent- or independent spread in HepG2-NTCPsec− (Fig. S10C).

PARAGRAPH

The high concentration of infectious HBV progeny in the supernatants would suggest spread via diffusion through an aqueous environment and random infection of single cells.

However, spread was visualized as an expansion of HBV-infected cell clusters caused by a short-distance route of HBV spread to neighboring cells.

Our model suggested that extracellular progeny virions released from de novo infected cells favored attachment to adjacent cells which required interaction with HSPG and NTCP at the plasma membrane for infection.

In the chimeric uPA/SCID mouse HBV-infected clusters were not observed at 8 wpi, however, advanced microscopic studies on the spatial–temporal distribution of HBV-infected cells in the liver during acute infection establishment have not been conducted.23

PARAGRAPH

During the viraemic ramp-up phase, intracellular cccDNA molecules and secreted virion rcDNA per infected cell increased simultaneously by 8- and 10-fold, respectively, corroborating that the cccDNA pool size is a critical factor for HBV amplification.

Entry inhibitors prevented not only expansion of HBcAg-positive hepatocytes, but also the enhancement of the intrahepatic cccDNA pool and secreted progeny HBV, suggesting that cccDNA amplification is predominantly (88%) dependent on an extracellular route of receptor-mediated infection.

This is in agreement with reports showing that MyrB blocks intrahepatic viral spread and cccDNA accumulation in humanized mice, with the authors concluding that intracellular recycling of nucleocapsids is only a minor route for cccDNA pool replenishment.26

We estimated that, in HepG2-NTCPsec+, intracellular recycling of de novo synthesized nucleocapsids accounts for ≤12% of the cccDNA pool amplification.

PARAGRAPH

Our cell culture platform combines 4 clinically relevant features of HBV-infected patients and animal models.

First, HBV is efficiently amplified following de novo infection.

Second, all released capsids are enveloped with LHBs and are highly infectious.

Third, the observed kinetics of HBV amplification during the establishment of acute infection resemble the multiphasic kinetics observed in patients and infected chimeric uPA/SCID mice.21–23

Fourth, like in infected chimpanzees, HBV does not induce any significant gene expression changes, underlining the reputation of HBV as a stealth virus.15

PARAGRAPH

A hallmark of our HBV platform is the exceptionally efficient amplification and secretion of infectious viral progeny driven by episomal cccDNA which originates from de novo HBV entry.

Compared to transfected hepatoma cells, HepG2-NTCPsec+ enable more physiological investigations of cccDNA epigenetic regulation and production of authentically enveloped, infectious HBV particles in concentrations suitable for analysis by electron microscopy.

The platform can be further used for comparative characterizations of HBV variants, for the amplification of clinical isolates using minute amounts of crude HBV patient sera, and for the evaluation of HBV patient strain-specific features like infectivity, viability, replication efficiency and antiviral treatment sensitivity including neutralizing anti-HBV antibodies, viral rebound kinetics following inhibitor withdrawal and the evolution of drug-resistant mutant virus quasispecies under antiviral treatment pressure.

Thus, this platform can elucidate the molecular biology underlying HBV morphogenesis, including envelopment, egress, secretion pathways and spread.

SECTION

Financial support

PARAGRAPH

This study was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (MSIT 2017M3A9G6068246 and NRF-2014R1A2A1A11052535) and the Gyeonggi Provincial Government.

SECTION

Conflict of interest

PARAGRAPH

The authors declare no conflicts of interest that pertain to this work.

PARAGRAPH

Please refer to the accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.

SECTION

Authors’ contributions

PARAGRAPH

A.K., J.Y., D.S. and M.P.W. designed experiments; A.K., J.Y., E.J., T.T.T., K.P., S.P., H.K. X.S., X.Q. X.H. performed experiments; J.Y.P., S.H.A., K.H.H., S.K.Y., J.H.K., W.S.R. provided significant resources.

All authors contributed to the data analysis and interpretation, and A.K., W.H.G and M.P.W. wrote the manuscript.