10.1016/j.jhep.2018.01.029

ABSTRACT

TITLE

A novel hepatitis B virus species discovered in capuchin monkeys sheds new light on the evolution of primate hepadnaviruses

PARAGRAPH

All known hepatitis B virus (HBV) genotypes occur in humans and hominoid Old World non-human primates (NHPs).

The divergent woolly monkey HBV (WMHBV) forms another orthohepadnavirus species.

The evolutionary origins of HBV are unclear.

PARAGRAPH

We analysed sera from 124 Brazilian monkeys collected during 2012–2016 for hepadnaviruses using molecular and serological tools, and conducted evolutionary analyses.

PARAGRAPH

We identified a novel orthohepadnavirus species in capuchin monkeys (capuchin monkey hepatitis B virus [CMHBV]).

We found CMHBV-specific antibodies in five animals and high CMHBV concentrations in one animal.

Non-inflammatory, probably chronic infection was consistent with an intact preCore domain, low genetic variability, core deletions in deep sequencing, and no elevated liver enzymes.

Cross-reactivity of antisera against surface antigens suggested antigenic relatedness of HBV, CMHBV, and WMHBV.

Infection-determining CMHBV surface peptides bound to the human HBV receptor (human sodium taurocholate co-transporting polypeptide), but preferentially interacted with the capuchin monkey receptor homologue.

CMHBV and WMHBV pseudotypes infected human hepatoma cells via the human sodium taurocholate co-transporting polypeptide, and were poorly neutralised by HBV vaccine-derived antibodies, suggesting that cross-species infections may be possible.

Ancestral state reconstructions and sequence distance comparisons associated HBV with humans, whereas primate hepadnaviruses as a whole were projected to NHP ancestors.

Co-phylogenetic analyses yielded evidence for co-speciation of hepadnaviruses and New World NHP.

Bayesian hypothesis testing yielded strong support for an association of the HBV stem lineage with hominoid ancestors.

Neither CMHBV nor WMHBV was likely the ancestor of the divergent human HBV genotypes F/H found in American natives.

PARAGRAPH

Our data suggest ancestral co-speciation of hepadnaviruses and NHP, and an Old World origin of the divergent HBV genotypes F/H.

The identification of a novel primate hepadnavirus offers new perspectives for urgently needed animal models of chronic hepatitis B.

