10.1016/j.jhep.2018.02.014

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Shp2 deletion in hepatocytes suppresses hepatocarcinogenesis driven by oncogenic β-Catenin, PIK3CA and MET

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Primary liver cancer, mainly hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), is a highly malignant disease.

While the overall cancer mortality and incidences are decreasing, liver cancer incidences are increasing rapidly in the United States.1

The lack of effective therapeutic drugs is evidently caused by poor understanding of the complicated mechanisms of hepatocarcinogenesis.

PARAGRAPH

Ptpn11 encodes a cytoplasmic tyrosine phosphatase Shp2 that can dock directly on ligand-activated receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) through its two SH2 domains,2 which immediately implicated a putative role of Shp2 in dephosphorylation and inactivation of RTKs.

However, genetic and biochemical data have disclosed a positive effect of this phosphatase in augmenting cytoplasmic signaling through the Erk pathway, proximal to RTKs.2,3

Consistently, Ptpn11/Shp2 has been identified as the first proto-oncogene that encodes a tyrosine phosphatase, with dominant active mutations detected in leukemia patients, with or without Noonan Syndrome.4,5

In contrast, our most recent experiments demonstrated a tumor-inhibitory role for Shp2 in liver cancer, because ablating Shp2 in hepatocytes triggered hepatocellular adenoma (HCA) in aged mice and also enhanced HCC development induced by diethylnitrosamine (DEN).6

Simultaneous deletion of Shp2 and Pten in hepatocytes dramatically accelerated and enhanced non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) and liver tumorigenesis,7 indicating concerted tumor-inhibitory activities of Shp2 and Pten in guarding hepatic homeostasis and functions.

Consistent with the animal data, concomitant Pten and Shp2 deficiencies were detected in HCC patients with poor prognosis.7

These results indicate an anti-oncogenic role of Shp2 in the liver, in contrast to its pro-leukemogenic effect in the hematopoietic system.

Similarly, several other groups reported that deleting some classical oncoproteins, such as c-MET, EGFR, β-catenin, Ikkβ and Jnk1/2 and Akt1/2, ironically exacerbated DEN-induced HCC development, although the underlying mechanisms are not fully understood.8–10

PARAGRAPH

To further dissect Shp2 functions in liver cancer, we examined the effect of Shp2 deficiency in mouse tumor models induced by c-MET and an oncogenic β-catenin mutant (MET/CAT).

Co-activation of MET and β-catenin signaling has been detected in patients with HCC,11 and hydrodynamic tail vein injection of MET/CAT oncogenes has been shown to efficiently induce HCC development in mice.11–13

Surprisingly, Shp2 removal in hepatocytes suppressed HCC driven by MET/CAT injection, despite the hepatic inflammation and fibrosis, and increased oxidative stress in Shp2-deficient liver.

Shp2 deletion also inhibited liver tumorigenesis driven by co-expression of c-MET and PIK3CA (MET/PIK), suggesting a requirement for Shp2 in relay of these oncogenic signals in the liver.

SECTION

Materials and methods

SECTION

Experimental mice

PARAGRAPH

The Shp2hep−/− (Shp2fl/fl:Alb-Cre+) mouse line in C57BL/6 background was generated by breeding Shp2fl/fl mouse with Albumin-Cre transgenic mice, as previously described.6,14

All animal studies were conducted on male Shp2fl/fl (WT) or Shp2fl/fl:Alb-Cre(Shp2hep−/−) mice at age of 6–23 weeks.

Mice were group-housed (2–5 mice per cage) except for less than 5% of mice who were single-housed later because of death of cage-mates.

All mice were maintained under a 12 h light/dark cycle with free access to water and standard mouse chow.

The animal protocols (S09108) and all experimental procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of the University of California San Diego.

For hydrodynamic injection, plasmids (Met: PT3EF1aH-hMet; Ctnnb1/β-catenin: PT3EF1aH-β-catenin; Pik3ca: PIK3CA-H1047RΔf-PT3EF5a; sleeping beauty transposase (SB): pCMV/SB) were kindly provided by Dr. X. Chen at UCSF.

Oncogene-expressing constructs were delivered by hydrodynamic tail vein injection into mice at 6–8 weeks of age, as described previously.12

SECTION

Statistical analysis

PARAGRAPH

For RNA-seq analysis, significant differences in gene expression were identified by FDR <0.05, and enriched pathways or gene sets were identified by p <0.05 or FDR-q <0.05.

For other studies, statistical analysis was done using GraphPad Prism 7.

Statistical significance between means was calculated by student’s t test.

P value <0.05 was considered significant (∗p <0.05; ∗∗p <0.01; ∗∗∗p <0.001).

PARAGRAPH

For further details regarding the materials used, please refer to the CTAT table and supplementary information.

SECTION

Results

SECTION

Shp2 is required for MET/β-catenin-driven hepatocarcinogenesis

PARAGRAPH

In previous experiments, we generated a mutant mouse line with hepatocyte-specific Shp2 deletion (Shp2hep−/−).14

Shp2 deficiency, while impairing hepatocyte proliferation following partial hepatectomy,14 also triggered HCA development in old mice and exacerbated DEN-induced HCC.6

In this study, we induced liver tumorigenesis in WT control and Shp2hep−/− mice, following hydrodynamic tail vein injection of two plasmids that express human MET (hMET) and a truncated β-catenin mutant, ΔN90-β-catenin (MET/CAT), together with the SB transposase.13,15

By examining the liver phenotype at different time points, we detected multiple tumor nodules in control mice eight weeks after injection of the oncogenes (Fig. 1A).

However, Shp2 deficiency in hepatocytes resulted in marked reduction of tumor burdens induced by MET/CAT, as evaluated by the liver vs. body weight ratios, tumor incidence, and the maximal sizes of tumor lesions (Fig. 1B).

Histological analysis indicated that the tumors were mainly HCC (Fig. 1A, and Fig. S1).

Thus, removing Shp2 in hepatocytes efficiently suppressed MET/CAT-driven liver tumorigenesis, in sharp contrast to the previous data showing that Shp2 deficiency dramatically aggravated DEN-induced HCC development in the same Shp2hep−/− mouse line.6

We examined the pathogenic process following oncogene injection, and found that tumor nodules were visible in WT mice by five weeks and progressed rapidly at eight weeks (Fig. 1A).

Tumor nodules were barely detectable in oncogene-injected Shp2hep−/− livers, with some lesions observed, including scalloped edges and slightly lumpy surfaces, as described previously.6

SECTION

Shp2 is also necessary for MET/PIK3CA-induced liver tumorigenesis

PARAGRAPH

We then examined the effect of Shp2 loss on liver tumorigenesis driven by another pair of oncogenes, hMET and PIK3CAH1047R (MET/PIK).

PIK3CA represents dominant active mutants of the p110α catalytic subunit of phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K), which have been detected in several types of cancer.16

Chen and colleagues demonstrated17 that hydrodynamic delivery of PIK3CA alone induced hepatic steatosis but not tumorigenesis, while co-transfection of PIK3CA with hMET or NRasV12 robustly induced liver tumor.

Consistently, we detected liver tumors in WT mice at 12 weeks after injection of MET/PIK (Fig. 2A).

Unlike the MET/CAT combination that induced tumor nodules clearly visible on the liver surface, MET/PIK triggered non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and diffused tumors in the liver.

Six weeks following MET/PIK transfection, the WT mice developed NAFLD and progressed rapidly, with tumors first detected around nine weeks post injection.

The Shp2hep−/− mice exhibited significantly decreased susceptibility to MET/PIK-driven liver tumorigenesis, as evaluated by the ratio of liver to body weights and pathological analysis (Fig. 2A-B).

Shp2 deletion also caused the liver to be less susceptible to MET/PIK-induced NAFLD, as revealed by less lipid accumulation during the time period and Oil-Red-O staining of liver sections (Fig. 2A, C).

When examined at 15 weeks, we did observe a few tumor nodules in some Shp2hep−/− livers (Fig. S2A).

However, immunoblotting detected Shp2 protein in the tumor tissues, with the surrounding hepatic tissues being Shp2-negative (Fig. S2B).

Thus, the tumors were likely grown from hepatocytes that escaped Cre-mediated Shp2/Ptpn11 deletion in Shp2hep−/− livers, reinforcing the requirement of Shp2 for MET/PIK-driven liver tumorigenesis.

Similarly, a previous report showed presence of β-catenin in tumor cells in Ctnnb1hep−/− livers.18

PARAGRAPH

We then asked if Ikkβ, a kinase that activates NF-κB pathway, is also required for MET/CAT- or MET/PIK-driven liver cancer.

Like Shp2 loss, deleting Ikkβ was shown to exacerbate DEN-induced HCC development,19,20 although a positive role of NF-κB signaling in driving HCC was also reported.21

Similar tumor burdens were detected in WT control and mice with Ikkβ deleted (Ikbkbhep−/−), examined at 8 or 12 weeks after transfection of MET/CAT and MET/PIK, respectively (Fig. S3A–C).

As revealed by Oil-Red-O staining, Ikkβ loss did not have a significant impact on NAFLD induced by MET/PIK (Fig. S 3B).

Therefore, despite similar aggravating effects of Ikkβ and Shp2 deficiencies on DEN-induced HCC,6,19 Ikkβ loss in hepatocytes did not have significant impact on liver tumorigenesis driven by either MET/CAT or MET/PIK.

Together, these results define a specific requirement of endogenous Shp2 in liver tumorigenesis at least driven by these two pairs of oncogenes.

SECTION

Shp2hep−/− liver is characterized by impaired proliferative capacity and increased oxidative and metabolic stresses

PARAGRAPH

To explore the mechanism underlying the unique Shp2 function, we conducted RNA-seq analysis to compare the transcriptomes in WT and Shp2hep−/− livers, at day 0, 3 and 7 after delivery of MET/CAT or MET/PIK oncogenes.

Overall, deleting Shp2 in hepatocytes caused dramatic changes in hepatic gene expression, before and after transfection of the oncogenes (Fig. 3A).

We first analyzed the baseline transcriptomes in WT and Shp2hep−/− livers at day 0, to understand why Shp2 loss makes hepatocytes unsusceptible to the oncogenic effect of these potent oncoproteins.

Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) showed that the cluster 1 highly expressed in WT livers was enriched for gene sets in mRNA transcription and processing (Fig. 3B), including Srsf7, Hnrnpa2b1, Tra2b, Fus and Rbmx, with Srsf7, Tra2b and Hnrnpa2b1 identified as Myc targets.22

The expression of these genes required for cell proliferation was in general decreased in Shp2hep−/− livers (Fig. S4A–B), consistent with the previous data that Shp2 removal suppressed hepatocyte proliferation.14

In particular, the expression of Pik3ri, Jun, and Fos genes downstream of the HGF/c-Met pathway, was downregulated in Shp2-deficient livers (Fig. 3C).

Shp2 ablation also caused changes in expression of genes in the Wnt/β-catenin pathway, and most of the genes predicted to be upregulated by Wnt signaling were expressed at higher levels in WT than Shp2hep−/− livers (Fig. 3D).

Together, these results suggest a negative impact of Shp2 loss on the basal levels of signaling through the HGF/c-Met and Wnt/β-catenin pathways in the liver.

PARAGRAPH

Relative to the WT control, the genes in cluster 2 that were highly expressed in Shp2hep−/− livers were those involved in oxidative stress responses and reprogramming of metabolic pathways (Fig. 3B, Supplementary file 2).

In particular, the highly expressed genes included Nsdhl, Dhcr24, Hsd17b7 and Cyp51a1 in cholesterol metabolism, Mgst1, Gstk1 and Gpx1 in response to oxidative stress, and the PPARα pathway that regulates lipid metabolism (Fig. 3B, Supplementary file 2).

Also highly expressed in Shp2-deficient livers were genes of nuclear receptor heterodimers PXR/RXR, LXR/RXR and FXR/RXR involved in modulation of metabolic processes (Fig. 3E).

Together, the RNA-seq data suggest that Shp2 deletion caused downregulation of hepatocyte proliferation potential, reprogramming of metabolic pathways and increased oxidative stress in the liver, before oncogene transfection.

SECTION

Shp2 deletion disturbed multiple signaling events induced by MET/CAT or MET/PIK

PARAGRAPH

The cluster 3 in MET/CAT-transfected WT livers did not provide much information except some genes involved in coagulation system and metabolism, such as F11, PLG, LIPC and OTC (Fig. 3B, Supplementary file 3).

We then used Ingenuity® Pathway Analysis (IPA®) to compare the day 0 and 3 transcriptomes in WT and Shp2hep−/− livers separately (Fig. 4A).

MET/CAT transfection triggered DNA damage responses, coagulation, and fibrotic processes in both genotypes, in particular the z-score of G2/M checkpoint regulation calculated by IPA was lower in the WT liver (WT: −2; Shp2hep−/−: −1.667).

Genes related to the checkpoint control and cell cycle progression, such as Plk1, Cdc25, Top2a, Cyclin B1 and Cyclin B2, were more abundantly expressed in the WT than the mutant livers, suggesting that Shp2 deletion affected the checkpoint passing and entry into M phase.23

In contrast, upregulation of checkpoint regulators, including p21 and Brca1, in Shp2hep−/− livers further suggests defective entry into M phase.24,25

This point was reinforced by upregulation of p53 signaling (Fig. 4A) and positive regulation of p53 target genes (Fig. S4E).

Thus, although MET/CAT injection promoted cell proliferation in both genotypes, Shp2 deficiency led to suppression of cell cycle progression.

In addition, we observed more severe inflammatory and immune responses in MET/CAT-transfected Shp2hep−/− livers, such as IL-10 signaling and dendritic cell maturation (Fig. 4A).

Next, we compared the transcriptomes between WT and Shp2hep−/− livers at day three after MET/CAT transfection, and identified enrichment of gene sets involved in inflammatory responses, leukocyte recruitment and cytokine secretion in Shp2hep−/− livers (Supplementary file 5).

Of note, the downstream targets in NF-κB pathway were upregulated in Shp2hep−/− liver (Fig. 4D), accompanied by downregulation of Myc targets (Fig. 4E, Supplementary file 6).

Impaired signaling to Myc pathway is likely one mechanism for inhibition of tumorigenesis in MET/CAT-transfected Shp2hep−/− liver.

PARAGRAPH

The cluster 4 in MET/PIK-transfected WT livers at day three included genes in DNA replication and G2/M transition pathways, such as Aurora B and PLK1 (Fig. 3B).

We then compared the day 0 and 3 transcriptomes in WT and Shp2hep−/− livers separately, using GSEA and IPA.

MET/PIK injection triggered higher enrichment of several cell cycle-related pathways in WT livers (Fig. 4B), consistent with the identification of cluster 4 (Fig. 3B).

In contrast, p53 signaling and cell cycle inhibitors such as Gadd45g and p21, were upregulated by MET/PIK in Shp2hep−/− livers (Fig. 4C), suggesting relative cell cycle suppression by Shp2 loss.

MET/PIK injection also induced immune response in the liver of both genotypes (Fig. 4C; Supplementary file 11,12), likely due to stress responses to oncogene overexpression.

When comparing the day three transcriptomes between Shp2hep−/− and WT livers, we found that Shp2 deletion caused increase in fatty acid metabolism and oxidative stress in response to MET/PIK (Fig. 4F, Supplementary file 7), consistent with the oxidative stress observed even in untreated Shp2hep−/− livers.

PARAGRAPH

We further analyzed the gene expression profiles seven days after oncogene delivery.

A GFP-expressing plasmid was also injected into WT and Shp2hep−/− livers as vector control, and the transcriptomes after the vector injection were very similar to the day 0 untreated livers in both genotypes (Fig. S4D).

The transcriptomes were very similar at day three and seven in WT or Shp2hep−/− livers injected with the same oncogenes, but the differences in gene expression between the two genotypes remained very significant at day seven after injection of the vector, MET/CAT or MET/PIK.

Commonly enriched in untreated and vector-injected Shp2hep−/− livers were genes involved in redox reaction, metabolic and apoptotic pathways (Fig. 3F).

Genes upregulated in MET/CAT-injected WT livers at day seven were enriched in RNA transcription related genes and genes transcriptionally targeted by NF1 (Neurofibromin 1), a negative regulator of Ras (Fig. 4G).

Enriched in MET/CAT-injected Shp2hep−/− livers were genes in immune response pathways and targets of GABPA (GA binding protein transcription factor, alpha subunit) (Fig. 4G).

MET/PIK transfection induced cell cycle progression related pathways in WT liver, while Shp2hep−/− liver was featured by elevated immune response (Fig. 4H).

The target genes of Myc and SP1 were downregulated in MET/PIK-injected Shp2hep−/− livers (Fig. 4H), suggesting impaired cell proliferation in the mutant liver.

SECTION

Shp2 deficiency down-regulates central proliferative signals and MET expression

PARAGRAPH

The results described above suggest ironically that Shp2 loss in hepatocytes triggered a tumor-promoting microenvironment in the liver.

Thus, the inhibitory effect of Shp2 loss on the oncogene-driven tumorigenesis is likely attributed to suppression of cell-intrinsic oncogenic signaling.

To address this issue, we interrogated the central proliferative signaling events in these two animal tumor models.

Immunoblotting of liver lysates demonstrated that exogenous MET/CAT expression induced marked increase of p-Erk signals (Fig. 5A), while MET/PIK injection enhanced p-Akt levels (Fig. 5B).

Shp2 loss suppressed MET/CAT-induced p-Erk and MET/PIK-induced p-Akt activation, as examined at different time points (Fig. 5A-B).

However, the induction of these proliferative signals by MET/CAT or MET/PIK was not affected by Ikkβ deletion (Fig. S3D–E), consistent with the similar tumorigenic phenotypes in WT and Ikbkbhep−/− livers (Fig. S3A–B).

PARAGRAPH

We then examined the exogenous expression of hMET, β-catenin and PIK3CA in the liver at different time points.

hMET- or Δβ-catenin-positive colonies expanded progressively in WT livers, but these signals were detected in Shp2hep−/− livers only at day seven and disappeared at week five and eight (Fig. 5C).

p-Erk signal was detected by immunostaining in WT but not in Shp2-deficient hepatocytes at week five and eight (Fig. 5D).

The p-Erk signal detected in mutant liver lysates (Fig. 5A) is likely from non-parenchymal cells, as observed (Fig. 5D).

Similar differences in hMET expression were observed between WT and Shp2hep−/− livers at week 6, 9 and 12 after MET/PIK injection (Fig. 5E).

At week 10, hMET-positive colonies formed in WT liver were also CD133-positive, which were not seen in Shp2hep−/− liver (Fig. S5A).

Reduced expression of c-MET was even detected at day three after plasmid injection (Fig. S5B–C), suggesting that Shp2 deficiency resulted in downregulation of the upstream RTK, c-MET.

Similarly, previous experiments demonstrated significantly reduced levels of c-Kit and PDGFRβ in Shp2-deficient hematopoietic cells and fibroblasts, respectively.26,27

Therefore, the Shp2 function in promoting RTK signaling results, at least in part, from its ability to sustain the upstream RTK expression or stability, with the underlying mechanism to be elucidated.

PARAGRAPH

We also determined the impact of Shp2 loss on Wnt/β-catenin signaling, by examining p-β-catenin levels and expression of downstream target genes.

Phosphorylation of endogenous β-catenin at Ser33/37/Thr41 was not affected by MET/CAT transfection in WT or Shp2hep−/− livers (Fig. 5A).

However, glutamine synthetase (Gl Syn)-expressing hepatocytes expanded beyond the perivenous areas progressively in WT but not in Shp2hep−/− livers (Fig. 5D).

SECTION

Shp2 modulates mitogenic signaling elicited by HGF and Wnt3a in the liver

PARAGRAPH

We further investigated the impact of Shp2 removal on HGF and Wnt signaling following portal vein administration of the ligands into the liver.

Injection of HGF potently stimulated p-Met, p-Erk and p-Akt signals, but these signals were abolished or diminished in Shp2hep−/− livers (Fig. 6A), confirming the requirement of Shp2 in mitotic signaling.

Wnt3a plus R-spondin1 stimulation did not alter Ser/Thr phosphorylation of β-catenin, nor its nuclear translocation in WT or Shp2hep−/− livers (Fig. S6).

However, the ligand injection induced low level of p-Erk signal in WT liver, which was abolished by Shp2 loss (Fig. 6A).

Consistently, treatment of isolated primary hepatocytes by HGF or Wnt3a in vitro induced higher p-Erk signal in WT than Shp2-deficient hepatocytes (Fig. 6B).

qRT-PCR analysis also demonstrated variably impaired expression of Wnt target genes, such as Ccnd1, Cldn1, Fst, Jun, Myc, Mitf and Enpp2, in Shp2-deficient hepatocytes following HGF and/or Wnt3a stimulation (Fig. 6C).

SECTION

Shp2 removal promotes cell senescence induced by oncoproteins

PARAGRAPH

We explored whether Shp2 deficiency in hepatocytes promoted cell senescence in response to transfection of the oncogenes.

Staining of liver sections demonstrated significantly increased signals for the primary senescence marker SA-β-galactosidase (β-gal) in Shp2hep−/− livers, compared to WT livers, at 7 and 12 days after transfection of MET/CAT or MET/PIK, respectively (Fig. 7A, Fig. S7).

Consistently, qRT-PCR analysis detected higher expression of cell cycle inhibitors p16 and p19 in Shp2hep−/− than control liver lysates, in response to expression of the oncogenes (Fig. 7B).

Meanwhile, dividing cell numbers were decreased in Shp2hep−/− livers compared to WT livers, as assessed by Ki67 and HNF4α staining (Fig. 7C).

β-gal signals diminished in Shp2hep−/− liver at week three and were barely detectable at week five post injection (Fig. S7), suggesting clearance of cells undergoing senescence.

Together, these results suggest that deleting Shp2 in hepatocytes not only inhibited proliferative signaling but also induced cell senescence, collectively contributing to the suppression of hepato-oncogenesis induced by MET/CAT or MET/PIK.

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

The requirement for Shp2 in MET/CAT or MET/PIK driven liver tumorigenesis identified in this study is in sharp contrast to the liver tumor-inhibitory role of Shp2 recently observed in the same Shp2hep−/− mouse line.6,7

The paradoxical pro- and anti-oncogenic effects of Shp2 in HCC development are apparently associated with the nature of oncogenic signals, cellular context and microenvironment.

Although removing Shp2 or Ikkβ similarly exacerbated DEN-induced HCC development,6,19 Ikkβ deficiency did not exhibit significant impact on hepatic tumorigenesis induced by these two pairs of oncogenes.

We also found that in contrast to the effect of Shp2 loss, β-catenin deficiency dramatically aggravated MET/CAT-driven HCC,28 although DEN-induced tumorigenesis was similarly enhanced in Shp2hep−/− and Ctnnb1hep−/− livers.8

PARAGRAPH

The data reported here argue that Shp2, acting immediately downstream of RTKs, is indeed an indispensable promoter for RTK-driven liver tumorigenesis.

Consistently, a most recent report indicated that inhibiting Shp2 by siRNA or chemical inhibitor suppressed proliferation of RTK-driven tumor cells in vitro, but had no significant impact on growth of cancer cells that were transformed by further downstream signaling molecules.29

One important mechanism for Shp2 acting positively downstream of c-Met is its ability to maintain stable expression of the upstream RTK.

Similar to this observation, we have found in previous studies that PDGFRβ was downregulated in Shp2-deficient fibroblast cells,27 and c-Kit expression was suppressed in Shp2-deficient hematopoietic cells.30

PARAGRAPH

However, the mechanism of Shp2 activities in cell signaling is likely more complicated than its functional interplay with RTKs, which is evidenced by its multi-faceted roles in liver tumorigenesis.

Shp2 loss led to downregulation of Ras-Erk signaling, a negative impact on cell proliferation and survival.

However, deleting Shp2 enhanced Stat3 activity,6 and induced higher expression of IL-6 and other inflammatory cytokines in the hepatic stroma.

Furthermore, Shp2 acts to coordinate FGF15/19 and bile acid signaling in control of bile acid biosynthesis.31

Therefore, Shp2hep−/− mice manifested hepatic injuries, cholestasis, fibrosis, and inflammation, thereby creating a hepatic microenvironment conducive for liver tumorigenesis.

Now, one unnerving question is why these chronic liver damages did not exacerbate tumorigenesis in Shp2hep−/− mice driven by MET/CAT or MET/PIK, which deliver potent oncogenic signals.

A possible explanation is that suppression of intracellular RTK signaling by Shp2 deletion outweighed the tumor-promoting effect of the tumor-promoting microenvironment created in Shp2hep−/− liver.

It follows that oncogenic activation of critical intracellular signaling pathways is the driving force, and the microenvironment provides conducive signals for liver tumorigenesis.

Supporting this theory is the data that MET/CAT-driven HCC was indeed exacerbated in Ctnnb1hep−/− liver, in which a tumor-promoting microenvironment was generated by β-catenin deficiency.28

PARAGRAPH

Since additional deletion of Shp2 enhanced hepatocarcinogenesis in Ptenhep−/− livers,7 it is also hard to understand why Shp2 deletion suppressed MET/PIK-driven tumorigenesis.

In theory, deletion of Pten or overexpression of PIK3CA should similarly promote the PI3K/Akt pathway.

One possibility is that Shp2-promoted Ras-Erk signaling is stringently required for MET/PIK and MET/CAT-driven liver tumorigenesis.

In particular, Shp2 is a critical player downstream of c-Met, a common partner for these two pairs of oncoproteins.

The RNA-seq data suggest common and distinct mechanisms for liver tumorigenesis driven by MET/CAT and MET/PIK, respectively.

Obviously, more work needs to be done to elucidate the disclosed pro- and anti-tumorigenic effects of Shp2 in the liver.

PARAGRAPH

The fact that Shp2 is an essential mediator of oncogenesis driven by c-Met, β-catenin and PIK3CA allows us to propose a molecular targeted therapy by pharmaceutical inhibition of this tyrosine phosphatase for patients with HCC and dominant active mutations or overexpression of RTKs and other upstream molecules that require Shp2 in signal relay.

However, inhibiting Shp2 will inevitably generate a milieu of tumor-promoting molecular and cellular factors in the liver.

These microenvironmental effectors produced secondary to inhibition of the primary oncogenic signals may be responsible for rapid tumor recurrence observed in the clinic.

Simultaneous suppression of the primary and secondary tumorigenic signals may be a most effective means of achieving lasting therapeutic benefits for patients with liver cancer.

SECTION

Financial support

PARAGRAPH

This project was supported by NIHR01HL129763, R01CA176012 and R01CA188506 (to G.S.F.).

K.K. was supported by a postdoctoral fellowship by Moores UCSD Cancer Center.

SECTION

Conflict of interest

PARAGRAPH

The authors declare no conflicts of interest that pertain to this work.

PARAGRAPH

Please refer to the accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.

SECTION

Authors’ contributions

PARAGRAPH

Jacey Liu, Yanjie Li, Wendy Chen, Min Zong and Kota Kaneko were involved in data acquisition and analysis.

Yan Liang and Gaowei Wang were involved in RNA-seq data analysis and interpretation.

Ruiyun Xu was involved in supervision of Yanjie Li’s experiment, Michael Karin provided the Ikkβfl/fl mouse line and data analysis.

Jacey Liu, Wendy Chen and Yan Liang were involved in the manuscript writing.

Gen-Sheng Feng was involved in study concept and design, interpretation of data, drafting and critical revision of manuscript.

Jacey J. Liu and Yanjie Li made equal contributions to the manuscript as co-first authors.

Gen-Sheng Feng is the corresponding author.

All Authors have seen and approved the manuscript being submitted.