10.1016/j.jhep.2018.05.035

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Family occurrence of autoimmune hepatitis: A Danish nationwide registry-based cohort study

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

Autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) is a chronic autoimmune liver disease with an incidence of 1 per 100,000 population per year around the world.1

It is a frequently held notion that AIH accumulates in families,2 but the degree of familial clustering has rarely been studied.

The existing literature suggests that AIH accumulates in twins,3,4 siblings,5 parents and children,3,6–8 second-degree relatives,3 and family members of unspecified relationship,9,10 but those studies were limited by small numbers of patients and did not compare AIH incidence with the general population.

Numerous genetic risk factors for AIH have been suggested,11,12 but genome-wide association studies indicate that genetics plays only a minor role.12

The basis for AIH family counselling thus remains inadequate.

PARAGRAPH

We conducted a nationwide population-based study on the familial occurrence of AIH.

Our primary purpose was to report data on the standardized incidence ratio (SIR) of AIH and the cumulative risk of developing AIH in first- and second-degree relatives of index patients with AIH from the time of the index patient’s AIH diagnosis.

Such information will be valuable for patient counselling, as in our clinical practice patients with AIH often ask us about their relatives’ risk of developing AIH.

Our secondary purpose was to report data on the SIR of AIH in co-twins of patients with AIH and to compare the AIH concordance rate in monozygotic and dizygotic twins.

SECTION

Patients and methods

PARAGRAPH

This is a registry-based family cohort study including 8,582 first-degree relatives and 9,230 second-degree relatives of 2,458 Danish citizens diagnosed with AIH from 1994 through 2015.

The study also includes 64 co-twins of Danish twins diagnosed with AIH from 1977 through 2011.

SECTION

Data sources

PARAGRAPH

We extracted data from the national healthcare registries through the Danish Health Data Board and The Danish Twin Registry with permission from the Danish Data Protection Agency (Supplementary CTAT Table).

The National Patient Registry contains information on all inpatient contacts since 1977, and since 1995, information on all outpatient contacts.

Data include dates of admission and discharge and discharge diagnosis codes.

Diagnoses were coded according to the International Classification of Diseases, 8th edition (ICD-8) from 1977 through 1993, and since 1994 according to ICD-10.13

Since 1997, the National Pathology Registry contains data on histopathological examinations categorized according to the SNOMED-classification,14 and most pathology departments also contribute data from earlier years.

The Danish Civil Registration System continuously updates data on parent-child relations, dates of birth, death, immigration, and emigration.

The Danish Twin Registry contains information on Danish twin pairs since 1870 obtained from various sources.15

Since 1973, the registration of all twin births in the Twin Registry has been complete owing to the Medical Birth Registry that covers information on all hospital or at-home live births and stillbirths in Denmark.16

Data from the Twin Registry include sex, date of birth, vital status, and zygosity.

The information on zygosity in same-sex twin pairs is based on a questionnaire about the phenotypic similarity in the twin pairs.17

Linkage of individual-level data from the healthcare registries is possible through the unique personal identification number that is assigned to all Danish citizens and incorporates data on sex and date of birth.18

SECTION

Identification and follow-up of relatives of patients with AIH

PARAGRAPH

We previously described a cohort of patients diagnosed with AIH from 1994 through 2012,19 and we updated this cohort in 2015 to include new patients.

For our primary analyses, we identified the index cohort of all Danish citizens who received their first discharge diagnosis of AIH (ICD-10: K73.2 or K75.4) from an inpatient admission or an outpatient visit between 1 January 1994 and 31 December 2015.

These index patients were classified as having or not having cirrhosis on their AIH diagnosis date.

Cirrhosis was defined by registration of a SNOMED-code for cirrhosis (M4950x, M4953x or M496xx) or an ICD-code for cirrhosis or cirrhosis complications, i.e. ascites, gastroesophageal varices, or hepatorenal syndrome (ICD-8: 571.92, 571.99, 785.39, 456.0x; and ICD-10: K74.6x, R18.x, I85.x, I86.4, I98.2, and K76.7) less than 60 days after the AIH diagnosis date.

PARAGRAPH

We identified first- and second-degree relatives of the index patients in the Civil Registration System through parent-child linkage.

Nearly all first-degree relatives of those born after 1960 can be identified in the registry,20 but biological and adoptive relatives cannot be distinguished.18

Approximately 1% of a Danish birth cohort is adopted (www.statistikbanken.dk).

First-degree relatives were defined as the index patients’ parents, children, and full brothers and sisters (siblings with the same mother and father as the patient).

Second-degree relatives were defined as the index patients’ grandparents, grandchildren, mothers’ full brothers and sisters, fathers’ full brothers and sisters, and nieces and nephews (children of full brothers and sisters).

If two or more patients diagnosed with AIH between 1994 and 2015 were family-related, the person with the earliest AIH diagnosis date was included in the cohort of index patients with AIH, and the other(s) in the cohort of relatives.

PARAGRAPH

We included and followed the relatives from the AIH diagnosis date of the index patient to whom they were related (Fig. 1).

The AIH diagnosis date was, for inpatients, the admission date when a patient first received a discharge diagnosis of AIH; and for outpatients, the date of the first outpatient visit in a series of outpatient visits when a patient first received a diagnosis of AIH.

Follow-up of the relatives ended at development of AIH, death, emigration, or at the end of the study on 31 December 2015.

SECTION

Identification and follow-up of co-twins of patients with AIH

PARAGRAPH

We identified twin pairs with AIH in the Twin Registry.

The index twins were defined as those who received a discharge diagnosis of AIH (ICD-8: 573.02 [lupoid hepatitis] or 571.93 [chronic hepatitis]; ICD-10: K73.2 or 75.4) from an inpatient admission or outpatient visit between 1 January 1977 and 31 December 2011 (i.e. the last date of updated linked data in the Twin Registry).

Their corresponding twins were defined as the co-twins.

If both twins were diagnosed with AIH between 1977 and 2011, we defined the twin with the earliest AIH diagnosis date as the index twin and the other as the co-twin.

PARAGRAPH

We included the co-twins who were alive when their index twins were diagnosed with AIH, and we followed the co-twins from their index twin’s AIH diagnosis date (Fig. 1).

The AIH diagnosis date was defined as described earlier.

Follow-up of co-twins ended at development of AIH, emigration, death, or at the end of the study on 31 December 2011.

SECTION

Statistical analyses

PARAGRAPH

For our primary analyses, we calculated the SIR of AIH with the indirect method in first- and second-degree relatives for their periods of follow-up.

SIR was defined as the number of observed incident diagnoses of AIH divided by the number of expected incident diagnoses of AIH.

The number of expected diagnoses was estimated by multiplying the Danish general population’s AIH incidence rate by the observation time in the cohorts of first- and second-degree relatives.

This was done in strata defined by sex and age.

We obtained the stratum-specific incidence rates for the Danish general population from our previous study,19 and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated with the exact method assuming a Poisson distribution of incident AIH diagnoses.

Next, we calculated the cumulative risk of developing AIH in first- and second-degree relatives from the index patient’s date of diagnosis with the competing risk estimator of cumulative incidence with death without AIH as a competing risk.21

PARAGRAPH

For our secondary analyses, we first calculated the SIR of AIH with the indirect method in co-twins.

Next, we calculated the AIH concordance rate for monozygotic and dizygotic twins separately to quantify the underlying liability to AIH and to estimate the etiological significance of genetics and the heritability of AIH.22

The probandwise concordance rate was calculated as the number of concordant twin individuals divided by the sum of concordant twin individuals and discordant twin pairs.23,24

95% CI were calculated using the standard errors of proportions.

Twin pairs with unknown zygosity were excluded from the concordance analyses.

SECTION

Results

SECTION

First- and second-degree relatives

PARAGRAPH

For 1994–2015, we identified 2,745 index patients with AIH, of whom 695 (25%) had been diagnosed with cirrhosis at the time of their AIH diagnosis.

A total of 2,458 (90%) of the patients with AIH had identifiable relatives: 8,582 first-degree relatives with a median age at study inclusion of 39 years (49% women, interquartile range 26–54 years), and 9,230 second-degree relatives with a median age at study inclusion of 18 years (49% women, interquartile range 8–42 years) (Table 1).

PARAGRAPH

In the first-degree relatives, the observed number of incident AIH diagnoses was six during a total of 64,020 years of follow-up.

All six were in parent-child relations: three girls whose mothers had AIH, one woman whose son had AIH, one man whose daughter had AIH, and one boy whose father had AIH.

None of them were related to an index patient with cirrhosis.

The median time between the diagnoses of AIH in the index patients and the subsequent diagnosis in the relatives was 5.5 years (range 2.3–12.9 years).

In the first-degree relatives, the expected number of incident AIH diagnoses was 1.2, and the resulting SIR was 4.9 (95% CI 1.8–10.7).

The 10-year cumulative risk of AIH from the date of the index patient’s diagnosis was 0.10% (95% CI 0.04–0.23).

PARAGRAPH

In the second-degree relatives, there were no observed incident AIH diagnoses during a total of 66,778 years of follow-up.

The expected number of incident AIH diagnoses was 0.8.

SECTION

Co-twins

PARAGRAPH

We identified 69 index twins with AIH.

Five of their co-twins could not be identified, so we included 64 twin pairs of whom 46 were same-sex pairs (22 monozygotic, 20 dizygotic, and 4 with unknown zygosity), and 18 were opposite-sex pairs (implicitly dizygotic).

The 64 co-twins (52% women) had a median age at study inclusion of 40 years (interquartile range 31–58 years).

Among them there was one incident AIH diagnosis during a total of 1,112 years of follow-up, and this case was in a monozygotic twin pair.

The expected number of incident AIH diagnoses was 0.02, and the resulting SIR of AIH in co-twins was 53.9 (95% CI 1.5–300.4).

The probandwise concordance rate was higher in monozygotic than in dizygotic twins: 2/(2 + 21) = 8.7% (95% CI 1.1–28.0) vs. 0/(0 + 38) = 0%.

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

This nationwide family and twin cohort study showed that the incidence of AIH in first-degree relatives of patients with AIH was increased fivefold.

Still, AIH was rare: in 8,582 first-degree relatives, there were only six incident diagnoses of AIH yielding a 10-year risk of AIH of 0.1% from the time the index patient was diagnosed with AIH.

In 9,230 second-degree relatives, there were no incident diagnoses of AIH.

In 64 co-twins of patients with AIH, there was one incident diagnosis of AIH during a total of 1,112 years of follow-up.

Our study supports the existence of familial clustering of AIH, but the absolute risk is very low.

PARAGRAPH

Our study has several strengths.

It is the first nationwide cohort study of family occurrence of AIH, it includes a large cohort of twins, covers a long time-period with complete follow-up, and uses the general population as a comparator.

Our identification of index patients with AIH was likely complete because of the free access to healthcare, the symptomatic manifestation of AIH, and the well-established diagnostic criteria for AIH.25

In our previous study, we found the same AIH prevalence and incidence as reported worldwide.1,19

We identified first- or second-degree relatives of 90% of the index patients with AIH, and we identified co-twins of 93% of the twins with AIH.

For the same reasons as stated above, all incident cases of AIH in the relatives, including the co-twins, were most likely identified.

PARAGRAPH

The validity of the registered diagnosis codes is a primary concern.

The diagnoses in the National Patient Registry have a high validity,26 and for our previous 1994–2012 AIH cohort, liver biopsies confirmed the clinical AIH diagnosis for 89% of the patients.19

However, the analysis of twins used data from 1977–2015.

This analysis therefore relied on ICD-8 coding which did not have a specific code for AIH, but instead had codes for ‘lupoid hepatitis’ and ‘chronic hepatitis’.

Therefore, if an index twin diagnosed with ‘chronic hepatitis’ did in fact have, e.g. chronic hepatitis C rather than AIH, his or her twin should not have been included in the twin cohort, and as a result we may have underestimated AIH incidence in twins.

However, the unspecific ICD-8 diagnosis codes could also have resulted in false-positive AIH diagnoses in twins of index twins with a correct diagnosis of AIH.

Unfortunately, we cannot access the patient files that would have confirmed the twins’ AIH diagnoses, so it will remain unclear how the non-specificity of ICD-8 diagnosis codes affected our findings.

However, we stress that ICD-8 codes were only used for the analysis of the twins, not the analysis of the relatives.

PARAGRAPH

Another concern is whether the AIH patients’ relatives and the population controls were similar with respect to diagnostic activity.

The five-year median time lag between two diagnoses of AIH within the same family suggests that our results in all probability were not severely influenced by ascertainment bias.

However, four out of the six incident cases of AIH in relatives occurred in children of patients with AIH, and we cannot rule out the possibility that increased awareness of AIH contributed to an earlier AIH diagnosis in the AIH patients’ offspring.

It is not clinical practice in Denmark to offer screening examinations to relatives of patients with AIH.

If such screening had been practiced, any relatives developing subclinical AIH may have been identified, and we might have found a higher incidence of AIH in the relatives of patients with AIH, and a different age distribution at time of diagnosis with more people being diagnosed at a younger age.

We standardized the incidence of AIH on the two strongest confounders, i.e. sex and age, and our results were most likely not severely affected by confounding, either.

PARAGRAPH

Like others, we found AIH accumulation in relatives of patients with AIH.3–6,9,10

Case-reports described two sisters with AIH,5 a mother and her daughter with AIH,8 and a pair of twin brothers, both with AIH.4

Ngu et al. described 72 patients with AIH and their 470 first-degree relatives of whom 1 (0.2%) had AIH, and this was in a mother-daughter relation.7

Van Gerven et al. described a cohort of 564 patients with AIH and reported that 3 (0.5%) of the patients had a relative with AIH, i.e. two first-degree relatives (a mother and a twin) and one second-degree relative (a cousin).3

Abe et al. described a cohort of 1,056 patients with AIH and reported that 11 (1%) of the patients had relatives with AIH, but the relationship and the number of relatives were unspecified.9

These studies were large, but it was a limitation that the index patients, not the relatives, were asked about AIH in the relatives.

Studies by Findor et al. and Wong et al. described AIH in three mother-daughter relations6 and in three unspecified family relations.10

These AIH diagnoses were verified, but the studies were small.

PARAGRAPH

Our study was much larger than the previous ones and showed a 10-year cumulative risk of AIH in the first-degree relatives of only 0.1%.

We followed the relatives for a median of seven years, but even so the expected number of incident AIH cases was only one, resulting in imprecise estimates of the relative risk.

The younger second-degree relatives in our study might not have had long enough follow-up time for definitive exclusion of development of AIH, and more precise estimates may come from our cohort eventually.

We did not have information on relatives who had AIH and died before the index patient’s diagnosis date.

This may be seen as a limitation of our data, but the results we present on relatives’ AIH incidence are much more relevant for patient counselling.

Rather than solely stating that AIH does accumulate in families, we are now able to quantify the risk of AIH in the relatives of newly diagnosed patients with AIH.

PARAGRAPH

Comprehensive twin studies on AIH have not previously been reported.

Nolte et al. reported acute hepatitis concordance, possibly with AIH origin, in a monozygotic twin pair.4

Van Gerven et al. found AIH concordance in one monozygotic twin pair and AIH discordance in five dizygotic twin pairs.3

In line with those results, we found AIH concordance in one monozygotic twin pair, but we also found AIH discordance in 21 monozygotic, 38 dizygotic, and 4 twin pairs of unknown zygosity.

Our single concordant case reflects a 54-fold increased risk of AIH for the twin sibling compared with the general population.

In monogenic diseases with high penetrance the total sibling risk is usually several hundred times higher than in the general population, and in polygenic (complex) diseases usually 2–20 times higher.2

Thus, our results indicate a polygenic etiology of AIH.

Twin concordance rates depend on disease prevalence, and an estimate of a true concordance rate is ideally based on life-long follow-up of all individuals, and this is often unattainable.

The higher AIH concordance in monozygotic than in dizygotic twins in our study indicates a genetic influence.

However, numbers were small, and we could not quantify the etiological significance of genetics or estimate the heritability of AIH.22

Our findings suggest that the genetic predisposition for AIH might not penetrate to more distant relatives.

The complex genetic susceptibility to AIH may relate to human leucocyte antigen-DR3 (DRB1∗0301) and DR4 (DRB1∗0401) that are strongly associated with AIH in Europe and North America,27 or it might relate to any of the other genes described to be associated with AIH,12 but we have no data to clarify this.

As ethnic genetic variances have been found for AIH,28,29 our study generalizes mainly to other Caucasian populations.

PARAGRAPH

In conclusion, we showed that in 17,812 family members of 2,458 index patients with AIH there were only six incident cases of AIH, all in first-degree relatives.

The 10-year cumulative risk of AIH in first-degree relatives was 0.1% from the time of the index patient’s AIH diagnosis.

Among 64 twin pairs we found one monozygotic and no dizygotic twin pairs with AIH concordance.

Our study demonstrates that AIH family accumulation is very uncommon, but at the same time indicates that genetic susceptibility does play a role in the complex etiology of AIH.

SECTION

Financial support

PARAGRAPH

Lisbet Grønbæk received funding from the Danish Foundation of 17.12.1981, Torben and Alice Frimods’s Danish Foundation, and Aase and Ejnar Danielsen’s Danish Foundation.

The funding sources had no involvement in the conduct of the research or preparation of the article.

SECTION

Conflicts of interest

PARAGRAPH

The authors declare no conflicts of interest that pertain to this work.

PARAGRAPH

Please refer to the accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.

SECTION

Authors’ contributions

PARAGRAPH

All authors contributed to the study concept and design.

Lisbet Grønbæk, Lars Pedersen, and Peter Jepsen collected the data.

Lisbet Grønbæk and Peter Jepsen analysed the data.

All authors contributed to the interpretation of the results.

Lisbet Grønbæk drafted the manuscript, and all authors revised it for intellectual content and approved the final draft.