10.1016/j.jasrep.2018.10.029

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Integrating SEM-EDS in a sequential residue analysis protocol: Benefits and challenges

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

The identification and characterisation of tool residues makes an important contribution to studies of functional analysis and the comprehension of past tool use activities.

While usewear analysis allows identifying the use motion of the stone tool and the worked material (e.g. bone, wood, antler, hide, pigments, etc.), the correct identification of a residue can potentially provide more specific information about the processed material, including the plant/animal taxa/species, or the geological origin of coloured pigments, on the condition that the functional cause of residue deposition is correctly identified (Rots et al., 2016).

PARAGRAPH

Past experimental work has indicated that intact residues, when present in large quantities, may be characterised in situ on stone tools by their morphological features when viewed with reflected light microscopes (RLMs), including stereomicroscopes with external light sources and high magnification vertical incident-light microscopes equipped with various polarising filters (e.g. Wadley et al., 2004; Langejans, 2012; Rots et al., 2016; Pedergnana and Ollé, 2018).

Other experiments have shown that macerated or smeared residues, which may be more analogous to what one may encounter archaeologically, are more difficult to identify on stone tools using optical microscopy alone (e.g. Croft et al., 2016, 2018; Lombard and Wadley, 2007; Monnier et al., 2012).

To accurately identify these physically altered residues, additional methods and instruments might be required, including those that provide enhanced visualisation of the residue on the stone tool (e.g. scanning electron microscope, SEM) or elemental/molecular residue characterisation (e.g. SEM with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS), Attenuated Total Reflectance – Fourier-transform infrared (ATR-FTIR) and Raman spectroscopes).

ATR-FTIR and Raman spectroscopes are used to quantify residues by means of spectroscopy, where the measured substance is stimulated with a focused laser beam (in the case of Raman spectroscopy) and infrared radiation passed through a dispersing element prism made from a single crystal (e.g. diamond) (in the case of ATR-FTIR) to generate a “fingerprint” spectrum of the measured sample, which may then be compared and identified using reference spectra libraries.

Elemental data may also be gathered using the SEM-EDS, which is also capable of producing high quality images at very high magnifications, much higher than that of any optical microscope.

Using this approach, analysts have successfully characterised archaeological residues on stone artefacts (e.g. Anderson, 1980; Anderson-Gerfaud, 1990; Cârciumaru et al., 2012; Cristiani et al., 2009; Helwig et al., 2014; Monnier et al., 2013; Smith et al., 2015; Vergès and Ollé, 2011) and in dental calculus (e.g. Power et al., 2014); confirmed the organic nature of possible glue remains (e.g. Bradtmöller et al., 2016; Dinnis et al., 2009; Pawlik and Thissen, 2011; Pawlik, 2004), and characterised adhesives on an antler ornament (Ruminski and Osipowicz, 2014).

The instrument works by scanning the surface of a specimen with a focussed beam of electrons that interact with the atoms in the sample to produce an image and the compositional information of the sample being viewed.

Adhering residues that are composed of elements with higher average atomic weights appear lighter/brighter than those residues with lower average atomic weights.

Organic residues (made up predominately of carbon and oxygen bonds) will appear dark on stone tools and are therefore easily distinguished on a stone substrate.

Historically, the use of the SEM required a sample to be covered in an electrically conductive coating (typically carbon, platinum or gold) for optimal imaging and analysis.

More recently, the use of the variable pressure “environmental” SEM has been used to analyse uncoated samples in low vacuum mode (typically using a backscattered electron detector, BED), eliminating the need for such coating and thus making it more attractive to residue analysts who wish to undertake residue examination in situ.

PARAGRAPH

Although the use of the ATR-FTIR and Raman microscope has been shown to be successful for the identification of residues on stone tools on both experimental and archaeological artefacts (e.g. Blee et al., 2010; Bordes et al., 2017, 2018; Monnier et al., 2017a, 2017b; Wojcieszak and Wadley, 2018), most analysts do not have access to such equipment, nor do they possess the expert skills to use the instruments and interpret the data.

Most residue analyses are therefore limited to the use of optical microscopes and less commonly, SEMs for in situ examination.

When residues are removed from the stone surface, they can also be characterised using other optical microscopes such as the transmitted light microscope (TLM).

Residues are usually removed from the stone by suspending adhering material in an aqueous solution that can then be prepared on a glass slide and examined under transmitted light using a range of magnifications (usually up to ×1000) (e.g. Fullagar, 2014; Cnuts and Rots, 2017).

Residues are typically easier to characterise once isolated from the stone substrate as they can be examined flat (rather than on an uneven stone surface) enabling their morphological features (and optical properties) to become easier to document, measure and photograph in focus.

Additionally, residues can be manipulated on glass slides, viewed in three-dimensions (e.g. various granules may be rotated), and stained to further identify a residue that may be mechanically damaged or otherwise unrecognisable based on their morphological features alone (see Fullagar et al., 2015; Rots et al., 2016).

Finally, residues residing in cracks, scars or other flaws within a stone surface that are otherwise “hidden” on the stone when examined in situ with RLM can be extracted and potentially identified.

PARAGRAPH

The extraction of residues is not yet standard procedure in residue analysis.

Langejans (2011) has argued that it gives a biased interpretation of the worked material as only a portion of the residues are extracted, resulting in an incomplete view of what is found on the stone tool.

A more recent study, however, has challenged this view by demonstrating that most residue types can be successfully recovered if an adequate extraction technique is chosen (Cnuts and Rots, 2017).

Water is usually sufficient for extracting most residues.

Residues that are extracted via pipette are dislodged through gentle agitation of the pipette tip, which then become suspended in the fluid medium before removal with the pipette and prepared on a glass slide.

The water will not cause damage to residues unless the residue is soluble in water (such as plant gums).

Similarly, other solvents (such as ethanol, acetonitrile, chlorofom and hexane) should only cause damage to residues that are soluble in that particular substance (for example, beeswax is soluble in chloroform).

Other damage to residues during sampling may result from overly aggressive removal techniques, such as damage from scratching with the pipette tip, or mechanical damage resulting in the break-up of fragile residues during sonication (Cnuts and Rots, 2017).

PARAGRAPH

We have argued elsewhere that residue extraction and examination under the TLM strongly enhances analyst ability to adequately identify residues, particularly when stains are used to differentiate between morphologically indiscrete residues (see Hayes et al., 2017; Rots et al., 2016).

Researchers who claim that in situ analyses using RLMs and/or the SEM-EDS are sufficient for residue identification have mostly only been able to demonstrate its effectiveness through limited experimental data sets in which residues were observed under pristine conditions, i.e. in fresh, non-degraded state, often in large enough accumulations that they were macroscopically visible and uncomplicated by contaminant sediments that one may expect on buried archaeological tools (e.g. Lynch and Miotti, 2017; Monnier et al., 2012; Pedergnana and Ollé, 2018).

While these studies were important for the initial documentation of intact, non-damaged residues; such residues (apart from those derived from modern contamination) are often not documented on archaeological tools.

Consequently, whether or not such instruments are sufficient for identifying cultural residues in situ under circumstances where residues may be highly degraded, damaged, scarce, or obscured by sediment, is yet to be adequately demonstrated.

PARAGRAPH

Relatively few studies have been published that investigate the effects of burial on stone tools and how degradation and contaminant particles may alter/obscure the physical appearance of residues under RLMs (e.g. Wadley et al., 2004; Langejans, 2011; Rots et al., 2016) and the SEM-EDS (e.g. Croft et al., 2016; Hayes and Rots, in press).

In these studies, authors agree that residue identification becomes significantly more challenging in these situations.

Picture reference libraries of degraded or otherwise altered residues will be highly important for the accurate identification of archaeological residues.

Several publications include of picture catalogues and EDS spectra of altered residues that provide a useful resource (e.g. Croft et al., 2016, 2018; Hayes and Rots, in press; Jahren et al., 1997).

However, an adequate methodology for studying and identifying such residues is yet to be described.

PARAGRAPH

In this paper, we explore the value of integrating the use of optical microscopes with the SEM-EDS in a phased analytical procedure for documenting residues that is also valid when residues are degraded, mechanically altered, covered in sediments and present only in low abundance.

The phased procedure for dealing with these far from “pristine” residues first includes the in situ documentation of adhering residues in conjunction with RLMs, and subsequently the analysis of removed residues in conjunction with TLM.

We discuss the challenges and benefits of using the SEM-EDS for characterising such residues and highlight some key instrumental complications (not discussed in previous publications) that may prevent residue identification.

We argue that the SEM-EDS can be relevant for both an in situ examination and an analysis of extracted residues when combined with the use of optical microscopes.

We also propose a new method for analysing extracted residues using the SEM-EDS and demonstrate its effectiveness.

SECTION

Methods

PARAGRAPH

Residues were examined on experimental stone tools from the TraceoLab collection at the University of Liège, Belgium.

The collection currently includes over 4000 tools including tools that have been used for various tasks and/or that have been manipulated to simulate a range of burial and climatic environments that may cause residue degradation and the build-up of incidental (i.e. non-use, contaminant) residues (see Rots et al., 2016; Cnuts and Rots, 2017; Hayes et al., 2017; Hayes and Rots, in press).

For the purpose of this study, we examined 44 experimental flint tools from this reference collection.

Tools had been used for durations of 2 min up to 1 h in the processing of materials such as wood, bone, antler, ivory, reed, potato, fish, animal flesh and hide (Table 1).

Tools selected for analysis had residues with varying degrees of preservation: some tools were examined prior to cleaning with residues that were intact and undamaged, while some tools were subjected to different cleaning procedures/chemical baths that resulted in the removal or damage of previously intact residues.

Other tools selected for analysis included specimens that had been used and buried and contained both non-use contaminant residues and as well as highly degraded use-residues (i.e. residues derived from use).

Analyses of these latter tools is highly useful for residue studies.

Given that archaeological tools are typically recovered from buried settings and have usually spent most of their life in the depositional environment, non-use derived residues such as sediments and other organic soil constituents (e.g. rootlets, fungi, decomposing faunal material and various micro-organisms) typically occur on many archaeological materials (Barton et al., 1998; Croft et al., 2018; Haslam, 2004).

In addition, once an artefact has been removed from the burial environment, an artefact may then be handled by any number of people and stored in numerous institutions before it finds its way to a residue lab for analysis.

Excessive handling and inappropriate storage of archaeological material without the appropriate measures (e.g. wearing gloves, storage in clean plastic bags) can result in contaminant residues such as skin flakes, finger grease and synthetic fibres from clothing (Bordes et al., 2017; Cnuts and Rots, 2017; Crowther et al., 2014; Pedergnana et al., 2016; Wadley et al., 2004).

Non-use residues obscure the identification of legitimate use-residues that become increasingly difficult to characterise when they are overlain by non-use contaminant residues.

In order to become familiar with these potential traces, an analyst must have a good understanding of what such residues look like and how they usually present themselves on the surface of an artefact (distribution, concentrations, etc.).

PARAGRAPH

The experimental tools (Table 1) were analysed using various optical microscopes and the SEM-EDS to first document tool residues in situ on the stone surface and subsequently to re-examine extracted residue material as individual residue particles using a sequential protocol adapted from Rots et al. (2016).

SECTION

Phase 1: in situ residue analysis

PARAGRAPH

Tool residues were documented on the stone tool at low magnification using a binocular stereomicroscope (magnifications up to 56×) with an external fibre-optic light source and a Zeiss V16 motorised AxioZoom microscope (magnifications up to 180×).

Colour photographs were captured with a Zeiss AxioCamICc5 and multi-focal images were produced with the HeliconFocus software.

In situ residues were documented at higher magnifications using a Zeiss AxioImager metallurgical incident light microscope (magnifications up to 1000×) with rotating polarisers and differential interference contrast (DIC).

Subsequently, residues were documented under a SEM using the JEOL-IT300, operated under low vacuum conditions to eliminate the need for a conductive coating.

SEM images were taken in backscattering mode typically under 100 Pa, 20.0 KV.

The elemental composition of the residues adhering to the stone were detected with EDS detector JEOL EX-230.

SECTION

Phase 2: residue extraction and analysis

PARAGRAPH

Residue extractions were sampled from experimental tools and examined as isolated particles under the TLM and under high vacuum mode in the SEM.

Residues for observation under the TLM were extracted with an adjustable pipette fitted with disposable polypropylene tips using ~10–20 μL of distilled water.

The extracted material was placed on a clean glass slide and examined under high magnification using a Zeiss Axioscope A1 transmitted light microscope (magnifications up to 1000×) with rotating polarisers and DIC.

Images were captured with a Zeiss AxioCam ICc5.

Stains were selectively applied to glass slides to identify diagnostic anatomical features and to highlight any ambiguous residues (for methods see Rots et al., 2016).

PARAGRAPH

Organic particles such as starch, pollen, blood and hair are regularly studied under the SEM-EDS.

These materials are typically prepared for analysis by mounting them on a piece of carbon tape fixed onto a bronze or aluminium stub, and subsequently coated with a conductive coating (e.g. carbon, gold or platinum).

Usually, the purpose of the analysis is to observe the particle under very high magnifications, rather than to generate EDS spectra.

As our intention was not only to produce high quality images of extracted residue particles, but also to generate EDS spectra, we wanted to avoid using carbon-based materials for mounting and coating, which would contribute to the EDS spectra for our examined residue.

For this reason, a new protocol was required to prepare organic materials for analysis of removed residues.

PARAGRAPH

Although organic micro-particles are regularly isolated and studied under the SEM-EDS, the examination of residues extracted from the surfaces of archaeological tools is rarely attempted with this instrument.

We are aware of only one study where starch grains were removed from a tool surface and examined under the SEM-EDS (Ge, 2013).

In this study, starch grains were removed from the tool via pipette extraction, isolated using heavy liquid, and prepared on a glass slide that was subsequently coated with gold.

However, image resolution of the extracted starch grains was low; probably the result of using the non-conductive glass slides that caused “charging” of the instrument (see below).

In order to achieve higher quality images, we adapted the method of Ge (2013) by using aluminium slides instead of glass.

Aluminium was chosen as it is a conductive metal and therefore highly suitable for SEM analysis.

Aluminium is relatively cheap and can easily be cut, polished and shaped into suitable slides for analysis, which can then be attached to the aluminium slide holder within the SEM chamber.

PARAGRAPH

Residues were extracted using 5–10 μL of ethanol with an adjustable pipette and immediately transferred to an aluminium slide.

Ethanol was selected as a sampling solvent as it has a fast evaporation rate and did not appear to affect/physically alter any of the examined residues—all of which were insoluble in ethanol.

Once the extracted material is mounted on the slide, the ethanol will quickly evaporate leaving only the particulate material.

The slide should then be examined under the stereomicroscope to ensure that sufficient material has transferred to the slide and that residues have remained intact (i.e. they have not dissolved in the solvent, which may be an issue for some plant resins).

The slide and remaining residues can then be given a conductive coating almost immediately, reducing the risk of contaminating the sample with airborne debris common in most storage environments.

We found that ethanol also allowed the particulate material to adhere more strongly to the aluminium slide compared with water or other solvents.

As mentioned above, we wanted to avoid coating our samples with carbon because it may interfere with our analysis of organic residues, given that they also have a high carbon content.

Due to the considerable expense of gold coating samples over platinum and given that we do not expect high contributions of platinum in our samples, we decided that platinum would be the most cost effective for our purpose.

PARAGRAPH

A sputter coater BALZERS SCD.30 was used to cover the slide in 100% pure platinum.

The slide was then examined in high vacuum mode under the SEM (see above) and imaged at 10–20.0 KV using secondary scattered electrons, allowing for excellent relief of residue particles.

EDS analysis was also performed on the extracted, platinum-coated residues mounted on the aluminium slides (see above) with the resulting EDS spectra providing an indication of the elemental composition of the residue as well as the aluminium substrate and coating.

Since the electrons will penetrate both coating and the subsurface of the coating, the coating will not hamper the EDS analysis.

The maximum electron penetration depth of the electrons will depend on the density of the material and the applied accelerating voltage (kV) and can be calculated using Castaing's formula (Castaing, 1960).

SECTION

Results and discussion

SECTION

In situ analysis

SECTION

Reflected light microscopes

PARAGRAPH

The RLM was very useful for documenting the location of larger residue accumulations to indicate the distribution and patterning of residues along the surfaces and edges of the tool.

On tools where residues occurred in high frequencies and were uncomplicated by various degradation processes or the build-up of non-use (i.e. contaminant) residues, many could be easily identified by their morphological features and optical properties when certain lighting arrangements (e.g. transmitted versus reflected light) and optical polarising filters were applied (see Fig. 3).

Many other residues, however, possessed overlapping morphologies that made them difficult to distinguish from other residue varieties, even when they were documented in pristine (i.e. fresh from use) conditions.

The difficulty of identifying these residues is more pronounced when residues were smeared, damaged or otherwise altered on the stone surface.

For example, experimental tools used to process bone, ivory, shell and antler had similar residues that could not be distinguished under the RLM.

Residues on these tools were characterised by a white opaque powder and cracked translucent films.

Experimental tools used to process fibrous materials such as wood, hide and fresh bone also possess similar residues that could often only be differentiated under higher magnifications and when the residues were still intact.

Undamaged collagen fibres originating from bone or hide working may be distinguished from wood by small fibrils within the collagen visible at around 200×–500× magnification.

Wood tissue has more distinctive cell wall boundaries and can be accompanied by the presence of other smaller plant tissues that become easier to identify at higher magnifications (e.g. starch) and particularly when viewed under the TLM (see below).

Tools with degraded collagen and plant fibres are nearly impossible to distinguish under the RLM as they lack distinctive colours and are less structurally intact (see Hayes and Rots (in press) for images and detailed descriptions).

PARAGRAPH

The RLM was less useful for identifying fragmented residues or those occurring in low abundance.

Experimental tools that were sonicated or thoroughly cleaned with solvents following use had very few residues remaining and only isolated tissues could be documented with the RLM though most would remain unidentified.

Unwashed tools that had been buried were covered in sediment and fibres, which obscured the stone surface and made the identification of use-residues near to impossible.

The most appropriate cleaning method for the removal sediments is through a light brushing of the stone surface (using a small, soft synthetic brush) and/or by gently rinsing the surface with water dispensed through a squirt bottle (see below).

SECTION

Low vacuum SEM analysis of uncoated specimens

PARAGRAPH

The SEM provided an effective means for visually identifying highly fragmented residues, residues that occured in low abundance in concealed areas, and organic residues.

Because organic residues contain carbon (C) and oxygen (O) bonds of low atomic weights, organic residues are easily recognised against the stone substrate (which is usually made of elements of higher atomic weights, such as silica (Si)) as they appeared dark grey in contrast with the light grey stone background.

The large working distance of the SEM-EDS also ensures that the same residue/area on the stone can be examined in focus at a wide range of magnifications.

Consequently, the SEM is highly effective at locating and imaging very small/fragmented particles, which is often not possible under the RLM either because the residue is too small, concealed in cracks, flaws or other micro-structures on the stone surface (Fig. 1A), or because the residue occurs as a thin, transparent film that cannot be distinguished from the stone substrate (Hayes and Rots, in press).

Multiple layers of residues can also potentially be distinguished with the SEM, which are typically not possible with the RLM (Fig. 1B).

PARAGRAPH

Certain residues that could not be distinguished under the RLM can be visually characterised under the SEM.

Shell residues from nearly all mollusc species consist of crystal plates of aragonite that become clearly defined under magnifications exceeding ×2000, at which point they can be distinguished from bone, ivory and antler (Fig. 2A–D).

Other researchers have also demonstrated the value of using the SEM for characterising certain residue classes that are not easily distinguished under the RLM (e.g. Monnier et al., 2012; Croft et al., 2016; Pedergnana et al., 2016).

By contrast, we found that some residues still display overlapping morphological features that cannot be differentiated, even when examined under higher magnification.

For example, smeared bone and antler residues occur in plate-like, layered accumulations that often have a “mud-cracked” appearance (Fig. 2A–C) and often cannot be differentiated (but see Croft et al., 2016); while collagen and plant fibres often occur as twisted fibrous masses resembling one another (Fig. 2E–F).

Previous researchers have reported that ivory can be distinguished morphologically from bone and antler under very high magnifications by its distinct arrangement of fibrils, which are in radially-distributed layers to form an interweaving cross-hatch network (see Su and Cui (1999) for detailed description).

Similarly, antler and bone residues are reportedly differentiated on the basis of the different crystal shapes at nanoscale when viewed under the transmitted electron microscope (TEM) (Chadefaux et al., 2008).

However, when ivory, bone and antler residues are smeared and are examined on a stone substrate, their morphology is less easy to distinguish and instrumental challenges associated with their examination in low vacuum mode (see below) prevent examination under the required very high magnifications.

We could not distinguish ivory from bone and antler as they occurred on the experimental stone tools.

PARAGRAPH

When examining residues that were buried and were covered in sediment, we could not easily distinguish the fragmented residues as being related to use or contamination using the SEM (for discussion, see Hayes and Rots, in press).

The sediment concealed many residues and most tools had organic growths including hyphae, bacterial spores and plant tissues/structures (rootlets, phytoliths) derived from the sediment.

Most of the time, these were recognised as contamination when RLM was also integrated into the analysis, but often obscured the organic use-residues making them difficult to identify before the sediment layer was lightly rinsed off.

We found that a light brushing of the loose contaminant particles using a fine, synthetic brush or rinsing with water dispensed from a squirt bottle was useful for removing sediments.

Both cleaning methods were successful at removing loose debris on the stone surfaces but did not cause the removal of strongly adhering/tightly affixed use-residues from the more protected areas of a stone (i.e., within scars, fissures and rougher zones of the stone surface) (see also Hayes and Rots, in press).

SECTION

Instrumental challenges of the SEM

PARAGRAPH

Because uncoated specimens must be analysed in low vacuum mode, it is very difficult to achieve a high magnification image of the targeted residue that is of sufficient resolution.

This is because the stone substrate is a non-conductive material, and therefore examination with the SEM often causes a “charge-up effect” (i.e. the phenomenon where the number of incident electrons becomes greater than the number of electrons escaping from the specimen resulting in the build-up of a negative charge at the point where the beam hits the sample), obscuring the image significantly.

There is also the added complication of positioning the artefact appropriately in the SEM chamber so that the point of interest is at the highest point (closest to the electron beam) and that the sample is as flat as possible.

We often found such positioning to be very time consuming and poor images resulted when the surface of the analysed zone was uneven.

We found it much easier to take SEM images of such zones at lower magnifications (up to ×500).

Other publications that describe residues in situ on stone tools only include SEM photographs at relatively low magnifications (generally <1000×) (e.g. Monnier et al., 2012; Pedergnana and Ollé, 2018), so we suspect other analysts have also incurred this issue but it has been left unreported.

Although we found it difficult to image residues at magnifications >×1000, the magnification range obtained still exceeded that achieved with stereomicroscopes and enabled a larger field of view compared with other RLM.

SECTION

EDS analysis of residues on stone substrate

PARAGRAPH

EDS analysis indicated the elemental composition for all documented residues, but with contributions from the stone substrate that often dominated the EDS signal (SiO) (see below) (Fig. 2G–L).

Organic molecules (CO with minor nitrogen (N) contributions) were documented in all organic residues that were visible under the SEM (organic residue “films” could not be measured).

Wood, collagen, starch, rootlets and hyphae all display a signal dominated by CO, with only very minor contributions from other elements that makes them very difficult to distinguish on the basis of their elemental composition alone (Fig. 2K–L).

Other organic residues that possess a distinctive inorganic component, however, were easily recognised with the EDS.

Such residues included bone, ivory, antler, fish scales, hair, skin and shell (Fig. 2).

The presence of apatite in bone, ivory, antler and fish scales is reflected by dominating peaks of Ca and P in addition to CO molecules (Fig. 2G–H).

Keratin molecules in hair and skin are recognised by peaks of sulfur (S) while shell, which is predominately made of calcium carbonate, contains a large calcium (Ca) component but is absent of phosphorus (P) (Fig. 2J).

Ivory could be distinguished from other osseous materials as it has greater concentrations of magnaesium (Mg) relative to P and Ca compared with bone and antler (Fig. 2I) (Albéric et al., 2018; Albéric and Reiche, 2015; Christensen, 1999; Reiche and Müller, 2018) Unfortunately, it is not possible to distinguish bone, antler and fish scales from each other on the basis of their elemental contributions (Fig. 2G–H).

PARAGRAPH

As mentioned above, the SiO signal from the stone substrate often dominates the EDS signal.

The SiO signal was reduced where residue accumulations were thickest as the electron beam could not easily penetrate through the large mass of material.

However, where residues occurred as thin films or were highly degraded, fragmented or present in low abundance, it was often very difficult to get an accurate reading of the residue that was not “drowned out” by an overbearing SiO signal.

We attempted to increase the probe current setting for EDS analysis to see if we could enhance the signal for the residue, but, as the stone substrate is non-conductive, an increase in probe current immediately caused the “charge-up affect” to occur and measurement was not possible.

Therefore, the value of an in situ EDS analysis decreases as residues become scarce, which may be expected when examining archaeological tools that have undergone multiple cycles of degradation.

PARAGRAPH

Occasionally, we found that the electron beam could actually damage or destroy an intact residue during EDS measurement when high acceleration voltages are used.

Higher acceleration voltages (kV) results in a higher temperature at the point where the beam is focussed that can potential cause damage to the organic tissue by means of melting or burning.

Damage during measurement occurred most frequently on starch grains, which would often become desiccated and cracked following stimulation, and thus altering its physical appearance permanently.

To reduce the likelihood of damage from the electron beam, acceleration voltages can be reduced, however, this in turn produces a weak signal and elemental data are less distinct.

SECTION

Extracted residues

SECTION

Transmitted light microscopes

PARAGRAPH

We found it much easier to characterise residues using a TLM on glass slides compared to RLMs especially when considering organic residues and when staining solutions were applied.

Similarly, smeared fibres and tissues that lacked distinctive structures under the RLM and SEM were able to be distinguished (using stains) as plant or animal.

Although many intact organic residues (i.e. those that were undamaged and not smeared) still possessed similar morphological features under transmitted light, the visibility of diagnostic features improved markedly.

For example, in some cases where organic fibres remained intact and non-degraded, collagen could be distinguished from plant fibres on the basis of the morphology, including the presence of collagen fibrils and coiled ends.

Starch grains that were removed from the tool surface and examined under the TLM were easily recognised, exhibiting a distinctive rotating extinction cross under polarised light (Fig. 3D).

In some cases, however, organic material could not be distinguished as originating from plant or animal, occurring as amorphous transparent tissue.

In these instances, the use of biological stains for distinguishing plant and animal residues was highly useful (Fig. 3H).

Specific stains are designed to highlight collagen, plant tissue, lignin, starch and other common organic residues and can greatly improve the confidence of identifying certain residues (see Rots et al., 2016; Stephenson, 2015).

Using staining techniques, shell can now be differentiated from bone, antler and ivory, which was not possible with the RLM.

SECTION

High vacuum SEM analysis of coated residue extractions

PARAGRAPH

SEM analysis of extracted residue samples with a conductive coating produced higher quality images then those imaged in situ on the stone tool.

This is because the SEM could be operated in high vacuum mode and thus many of the instrumental challenges associated with analysis, such as the “charge-up effect”, could be reduced (see above).

The sample may also be viewed with secondary electrons (rather than backscattered electrons) for excellent topographical relief (Fig. 4).

Residues were also much easier to view as they were more-or-less flat on the aluminium slides and could be viewed at much higher magnifications than what we achieved during in situ analysis.

SECTION

EDS analysis of residues on conductive substrate

PARAGRAPH

EDS measurements of extracted residues did not always reflect a higher sensitivity/accuracy of identified elements compared with the EDS measurements made on residues in situ on the stone surface, despite having a conductive coating that enabled higher probe currents to be used that may theoretically enhance sensitivity.

We attribute this to a decreased abundance of residues in the extracted residue sample.

On the extracted and coated residue slides, a background signal of SiO resulting from the stone substrate is instead replaced with a background signal of both Al (from the aluminium slide) and Pt (from the platinum coating).

However, we suspect that the contributions of these elements in analysed residues are minimal.

As with EDS measurements made in situ on stone tools, occasionally the electron beam would damage residues (see above) (Fig. 5).

SECTION

Proposed protocol for residue identification

PARAGRAPH

Residue analysis makes an important contribution to the study of stone tool function but requires the accurate identification of adhering material as well as adequate interpretations of the residue origin (i.e. whether from use, hafting, manufacture, or contamination).

Contaminant particles in the form of sediments and other handling and storage residues are often the most dominant residue type on archaeological artefacts.

To reduce the amount of non-use contaminant residues post excavation, artefacts selected for residue analysis (selected following an initial quick scan of the artefact macroscopically or under the stereomicroscope that may indicate it likely functioned as a tool) should be stored individually in zip-lock bags and examined prior to intensive technological and usewear analyses where the tools may be excessively handled or cleaned.

Any handling of the artefacts prior to residue analysis should be done so wearing clean, starch-free gloves to limit the transferral of finger grease, dirt and skin flakes.

Artefacts should not be aggressively washed (scrubbed or sonicated) or chemically cleaned until after residue analysis is complete.

PARAGRAPH

The use of the SEM-EDS instrument has proven to be highly useful for the analysis of tool residues, but, like any other analytical technique, it needs to be well integrated in an analytical trajectory.

In our opinion, SEM-EDS is not an efficient technique to be used for initial screening purposes (i.e. used in lieu of the stereomicroscope or other optical microscopes) but it is highly beneficial when integrated in a sequential protocol for residue analysis (see Fig. 6).

We propose a protocol that includes an initial phase involving the in situ screening of residues using RLM and the SEM-EDS in low vacuum mode; followed by a second phase where residues are removed from the stone substrate and analysed under the TLM and again with the SEM with a conductive coating in high vacuum mode.

PARAGRAPH

Residue analysis should always be as minimally destructive as possible with destructive analyses limited to the removal of adhering residues for subsequent (potentially eradicative) analyses.

Ideally, all investigations should begin with an in situ residue screening to document adhering residues, including those assumed to be functional (i.e. related to use, hafting, manufacture, resharpening, etc.), taphonomic or contamination, and to evaluate the degree of degradation/preservation.

Due to the considerable time it may take to properly position the artefact within the SEM chamber, it is beneficial to screen the tool first with the RLM for dense residue accumulations or locations that may harvest residues (e.g. scars, micro-cracks or other zones on the tool that have high potential for harvesting or protecting micro-residues).

Once the artefact is correctly positioned in the SEM chamber, the area of interest can be easily located using the motorised stage and camera, which are typical components of more recent SEM models.

In some (very rare) instances, residues may be characterised based on their morphological features using the RLMs alone without the SEM or the removal of residues.

However, in most instances, and particularly when analysing archaeological material, residues are degraded, damaged, smeared or otherwise altered on the tool surface and may require further analysis with other instruments.

We suggest integrating the SEM as a next step particularly for identifying organic residues that stand out against the stone substrate, and highly fragmented residues or those “hidden” in the cracks, scars or other imperfections in the stone.

PARAGRAPH

Unfortunately, clear images of residues at very high magnifications are often difficult to obtain as the SEM has to be operated in backscattered mode as to avoid the charge up effect, and EDS analysis can sometimes be less reliable for residues that are measured in situ (compared with extractions) due to the overbearing signal of the stone substrate.

Only where residue accumulations are thick can an accurate EDS signature be generated.

When this is the case, the EDS is highly useful for distinguishing certain residues that have very similar optical properties but possess different elemental compositions (e.g. shell and bone; blood and conidia).

When the instrumental challenges of the SEM are overbearing, residue extractions and subsequent examination under the TLM can be highly beneficial for identifying residues.

Not only does imaging of constituent residues become easier, but amorphous organic residues that cannot be characterised under RLMs or the SEM, may be distinguished as animal or plant (or various components of animals or plants) through the use of staining agents.

Subsequent SEM-EDS on extracted residues prepared on conductive slides and given a conductive coating enables residues to be documented and photographed with excellent topographic relief.

In some instances, these improvements may also enhance the interpretive value of specific residues; for example, starch may perhaps be more easily identified to taxa based on specific morphological features documented with secondary electrons (e.g. surface relief).

PARAGRAPH

The potential for identifying prehistoric use-related residues on archaeological tools may be increased using our phased procedure.

The RLM and SEM-EDS offer a means to examine residues in situ on stone tools to document their position in relation to the worked edge, while the extraction and subsequent examination of residues using the TLM and SEM-EDS can further identify or confirm the presence of specific residues.

Although our phased protocol may seem more time consuming than typical residue analyses as multiple steps are required, it is actually more efficient in terms of time investment as residues initially identified under the RLM can be immediately verified using the SEM before extractions are considered.

Furthermore, the combination of multiple complementary techniques using a variety of instruments will provide the most reliable residue identifications as any specific limitations of one method can be addressed with another (see also Borel et al., 2014; Byrne et al., 2006).

Finally, the extraction of residues from the tool surface (which is often considered destructive) and subsequent preparation on glass/aluminium slides, provides a means for permanently preserving the residues that may otherwise be washed away or contaminated when manipulated prior to, or during, usewear and technological analysis.

Consequently, extracting residues is the only way to actually truly retain them for future analyses.

We believe that the application of this protocol on archaeological materials provides the best guarantee to obtain reliable results knowing that archaeological residues may be more fragile or damaged than those sampled for this study.

SECTION

Conclusion

PARAGRAPH

SEM-EDS analysis has not yet been widely applied in residue analysis and many of its benefits and challenges were still unknown.

Previous research had indicated that the SEM-EDS could make an important contribution to residue analysis, but attention had mainly been focused on the analysis of pristine experimental residues.

In this paper, we have demonstrated that SEM-EDS may improve residue identifications and we have proposed that it is ideally incorporated in a sequential protocol to analyse tool residues first in situ and then from extracted solutions.

We have proposed a new and successful method for the removal and preparation of extracted residues under the SEM, which has been rarely attempted before.

SEM-EDS also proved useful to identify residues on tools that have undergone various stages of degradation or that have been buried for long durations.

In these situations, which is usually standard for archaeological specimens, one can almost certainly be assured that an analyst will have a reduced ability to: 1) adequately identify the residue; and 2) unequivocally relate the residue to use.

Our analyses of experimental tools have indicated that the use of the RLM alone is insufficient for the identification of residues on most archaeological tools (i.e. those that have been buried or have degraded/physically altered residues) and further analysis using transmitted light microscopes or the SEM-EDS is required to improve our identifications and interpretations.

Instrumental limitations exist for both optical microscopes and the SEM.

We believe some of the instrumental issues associated with the SEM-EDS regarding imaging and the charge-up effect may be overcome by extracting residues and preparing them for examination with the SEM in high vacuum mode.

Future studies will aim to assess the value of these instruments looking at residues in very low abundances, residues that are highly degraded, and residues that have been buried for long durations where contaminant particles are abundant.