10.1016/j.jasrep.2018.10.030

FULLTEXT

TITLE

Characterization of building materials by means of spectral remote sensing: The example of Carcassonne's defensive wall (Aude, France)

SECTION

Introduction

SECTION

A global project

PARAGRAPH

In this paper, we explore the possibilities of a close range application of hyperspectral image-based instruments, coupled with portable NIR probe and ED-XRF, to record and compare chemical signatures of stone elements in historical buildings.

The combination of spectral features and elemental analysis is valuable to distinguish sandstone types according to their composition and mineral components.

Our interdisciplinary approach to the study of constructions involves the indirect chemical characterization of stone elements associated to the stratigraphic analysis of standing structures in order to delineate the story of a monument contextualised in the surrounding landscape.

The association of raw material types and phases of construction helps in unravelling details of stone supply dynamics and organization of labour on the working site.

PARAGRAPH

Our case study is the inner defensive wall in the citadel of Carcassonne, situated in the Aude region in Southern France (Fig. 1a), a site registered with Unesco World Heritage Monuments since 1997.

A great deal has been written about Carcassonne, and scholars have been investigating its iconic military architecture since the XIX century.

The earliest historical and archaeological studies concerning the citadel and its walls were published by Jean-Pierre Cros-Mayrevieille (1846, 1850, 1896) and Viollet-le-Duc (1878), commissioned in 1850 to restore the entire fortress.

The remarkable monographs of Viollet-le-Duc and Joseph Poux (1923) were later followed by studies focusing on specific issues (Bekker-Nielsen, 2008; Foudrin, 2001; Fourdrin, 2002; Héliot, 1966; Rancoule, 1979; Salamagne, 1999).

A global study of the architecture, merging historical, archaeological and scientific data, was missing until 2014, when a Collective Research Project (Projet Collectif de Recherche – PCR, led by Marie-Élise Gardel et Nicolas Faucherre) was initiated with the ambition of compiling the existing data and completing the investigation of the citadel urban space, with a particular focus on the military architecture.

The international project was carried out in collaboration with several institutions and lasted until 2016.

The work of different research teams was integrated in preliminary reports (Allios et al., 2016; Faucherre et al., 2016) constituting the basis for future research.

The interdisciplinary study included documentation of the standing structures as well as collection of archive documents and characterization of the building materials provenance.

This extended examination of the big architectural complex brought a new and broader perspective on the monument as an assemblage of material elements and inscribed meanings, as a single but multifaceted historical object.

SECTION

Archaeology of building materials as archaeology of natural resources

PARAGRAPH

Archaeology of freestanding structures relies on the stratigraphic observation of walls, with identification of macro and micro phases of construction, restoration and repair.

Archaeology of architectures is a well-established discipline with a long tradition of studies, initiated at the end of the XIX century (Davies, 1987, Ferris, 1989, Morriss and Betty, 2000, Schuller, 2002).

Scholars have made important contributions to the subject from the 70ies onwards, focusing on the stratigraphic analysis of structures and characterization of building materials (Bessac et al., 1999; Boato, 2008; Boto-Varela et al., 2012; Brogiolo, 1996; Brogiolo and Cagnana, 2012; Cagnana and Mannoni, 2000; D'Ulizia, 2005; Mannoni, 1976; Mannoni, 1984; Mannoni, 1990; Mannoni and Boato, 2002; Parron-Kontis and Reveyron, 2005; Reveyron, 2002).

PARAGRAPH

Archaeology of architecture is also archaeology of building materials and, as such, is committed to documenting trails of stone, from a historical and geographical perspective, including the result of raw materials transformation and assemblage, from the quarry, to the construction site, to the eventual reuse or abandon (Edensor, 2011).

Determination of building materials types and provenance is crucial to understand the network of exchanges existing between a construction site and the surrounding territory.

In fact, an anthropic landscape is continuously transformed through exploitation of geological materials: blocks extracted from quarries are transported and implemented in new structures, leaving behind carved empty spaces.

PARAGRAPH

On the other side, documentation of stone technology and architectural solutions helps determining organization of labour on the construction site.

Generally, important construction campaigns rely on the usage of regular blocks mostly extracted from one single quarry and dressed by teams of expert stonemasons, while smaller interventions can be achieved by non-professional workers using diverse materials.

PARAGRAPH

A broad interdisciplinary approach to historical monuments, encompassing the study of materials and resources, has been shown to be fruitful to understand diachronic organization of supply sites and development of construction techniques (Blary et al., 2008; Gély and Lorenz, 2011).

If different construction styles in masonries can be pinpointed by an attentive stratigraphic documentation of standing structures, implementing the geochemical description of stone types is more challenging.

PARAGRAPH

Characterization of building materials is mostly conducted through petrographic observation of the rock types, often combined with chemical analysis operated on selected samples (Colao et al., 2010; Dreesen and Dusar, 2004; Götze et al., 2007; Michalski et al., 2002).

PARAGRAPH

Nevertheless, a close observation of stone modules and collection of samples for destructive analysis is not always possible.

A solution can be found by combining the archaeological protocol for the study of standing structures with non-destructive analytical methods, with the intent of screening large datasets of materials and achieve a fast geochemical characterization.

PARAGRAPH

In order to study portions of masonry, we combined portable non-destructive techniques such as a MicroNIR probe and a portable ED-XRF together with hyperspectral imaging on vertical structures.

Spectral remote sensing is well known to scholars as a tool for survey and identification of archaeological features in multispectral-hyperspectral aerial images (Cavalli et al., 2007; Grøn et al., 2011; Kurz et al., 2011; Masini and Soldovieri, 2017; Parcak, 2009; Traviglia, 2006).

Spectral imaging has also been shown to be crucial for mapping geological outcrops at different scales and is applied for mineral explorations and characterization of quarry walls (Goetz et al., 1983; Greenberger et al., 2015; Gupta, 2013; Kruse, 2012).

Considering the flexibility of Near Infrared Spectroscopy instruments and portable ED-XRF, we decided to test a protocol integrating both imaging and point measurements, to better describe the variability of materials in the masonries.

SECTION

Materials and methods

SECTION

“La cité”

PARAGRAPH

This study focuses on the inner of two concentric circles of fortified walls enveloping the citadel of Carcassonne.

The composite architecture is constituted of a series of towers and curtain walls, revealing several distinct construction phases.

While the inner rampart is composed of overlapped wall patches, a result of construction and restoration campaigns from late Antiquity until the present, the outer wall was mostly built during the 13th century and completed in a shorter time span.

The history of the town is embodied in its defensive system: built, partially destroyed, re-built and restored over centuries.

The first construction phase of the inner wall of the Roman colony Julia Carcaso, already part of the province of Gallia Narbonensis, dates back to late antiquity, during the political troubles of the 3rd century AD (Gardel et al., 2003; Gardel and Enjalbert, 2015; Gardel et al., 2017; Heijmans, 2006; Passelac, 2001).

Stretches of this ancient fortification are characterised by small elements on regular beds, 9–10 cm height, intermediated by bricks.

Bricks in the masonry have been dated by paleomagnetism to the mid-3rd century (Report: Lanos P. Mourges C., 1996, Report, PHL-1996-2, Carcassonne, Enceinte intérieure de la Citée, tour effondrée prés du Grand-Burlas, 1 lot de briques: 11069-B, CNRS, UMR 153.).

The construction was probably reinforced in the 5th century against the recurring incursions of the Visigoths and later, when Carcassonne became part of the Visigothic domains.

In the 8th century, after being occupied by the Umayyads forces for few years, the town was conquered by the Carolingian and ruled by emissaries of the emperor.

At the end of the 9th century Carcassonne and surroundings were controlled by the Trincavel family, in this period of feudal prosperity both the cathedral of Saint Nazaire and the count's castle were built and the wall repaired from damages caused by centuries of war (Bruand, 1973; Bruand, 1982; Gardel, 2001; Héliot, 1966; Salamagne, 1999).

During the 12th century the Cathar heresy spread in the southern regions of the kingdom of France until 1208, year in which Pope Innocent III called the Albigeans crusade in order to eradicate it.

In 1209 Carcassonne was sieged by the crusaders lead by Simon de Monfort, and when the army finally entered the city a substantial part of the suburbs and defensive walls was destroyed.

A last attempt of the Trincavel family, few years later, to reclaim the citadel led to various battles and another siege that left the walls profoundly damaged.

In 1240 Carcassonne finally became part of the domain of the king of France and the King Louis IX (Saint Louis) ordered the renovation of the defensive system and the construction of a second rampart around the existing one.

The construction project was completed years later, under the reigns of Philippe III and Philippe IV.

From the 15th century onwards, the citadel was gradually abandoned and the few inhabitants moved down by the river in the faubourg built after 1240.

The citadel was kept under the jurisdiction of the ministry of the armed forces until the 19th century when architects such as Prosper Mérimée (1835) and Gabriel Cros-Mayrevieille (1850) started showing interest in the monument and its preservation.

In 1853 the big restoration campaign was approved and financed on the project of Eugene Viollet-le-Duc, who made of it a manifesto of his theory of architectural restoration (Viollet-le-Duc, 1878).

PARAGRAPH

The analysis of written documents in the archives and previous archaeological and historical research has shown that the defensive walls of Carcassonne are the result of a long series of construction and transformation events.

Discontinuous patches of masonry are recognizable and can be ascribed to historical events and major interventions on the building.

A few macro phases characterised by distinctive construction styles can be mapped on the vertical surfaces, but a large part of the history of the citadel is still unknown and the close reading of this incredible artefact still hides surprises.

During the two years research project, the documentation of style and typology of various stretches of masonry was combined with the systematic measurement of single stone elements' dimensions on the whole perimeter of the inner rampart, while the geochemical characterization of stone materials was conducted on four sampled spots in order to test the combination of the analytical techniques and evaluate the results (Fig. 1b).

PARAGRAPH

As shown in Table 1, we propose eight macro phases that can be dated by association to historical events or construction campaigns reported directly or indirectly in the written sources.

SECTION

Building materials and geology of the Aude valley

PARAGRAPH

Carcassonne is situated in the Aude region, in the valley between the mountain ranges of the Massif Central and the Pyrenees.

The plain, of alluvial origins, is characterised by sedimentary bedrock, mostly sandstone.

The various layers of sand and calcitic binder forming the sandstone of the Aude valley originated from both mountain regions, resulting in a mixed composition of quarzitic and volcanic aggregates.

The citadel is placed on the top of a hill incorporating a thick layer of compacted sandstone called “molasse de Carcassonne” covered by a bed of more etherometric elements with sandstone boulders (Berger et al., 1993; Bilotte and Capera, 1990).

The materials used for the construction of the inner wall reflect the geological nature of the area, with sandstone being the predominant raw material used in all phases.

In the archive documents, there is no mention of particular supply sites or of batches of stones purchased or traded for building the wall.

Viollet-le-Duc, in his first report about the conservation of the historical monuments of Carcassonne, in 1844, observes that the poor state of the monument was partly due to the bad quality of the stone used for the construction (Poux 1923, Vol III/2, pp. 449).

The landscape around Carcassonne has been deeply transformed by urban development and extraction activities causing the obliterations of most ancient quarrying sites.

In this circumstance, supply sites are not clearly identifiable (and this could be the case, unfortunately, of numerous other ancient monuments), nevertheless, a systematic survey of sandstone outcrops and their analysis through the same combination of methods, could help finding raw materials provenience and help shed a light on the process of transformation of the territory.

Even though the supply sites are not easily identifiable, the observation of raw materials used in the construction reveals the presence of different sandstone types with peculiar characteristics.

Specific geological features distinguish a few macroscopic raw materials groups: colours of sandstones vary from grey to yellow with features created by soil development processes in the original sand deposits, such as clay lumps (fine grained and greyish coloured) or red stains (due to the accumulation of iron oxides).

The building materials also display marks caused by atmospheric agents.

The stone blocks display various erosion patterns such as alveolar weathering, differential erosion of the beddings and scaling due to wet-dry expansion of clay minerals.

This large-scale deterioration of building materials is visible across the entire citadel and cannot be ascribed to a specific sandstone type or construction phase.

The determination of specific dynamics of degradation remains problematic and should be addressed with specific studies aimed at monuments preservation (Fitzner et al., 2003; Jiménez-González et al., 2008; Götze and Siedel, 2004; Griffin et al., 1991; Rihosek et al., 2016; Siedel, 2010; Siedel and Siegesmund, 2014).

SECTION

Analytical methods

PARAGRAPH

Considering the geological peculiarity of the stone elements used for the construction and the considerable dimension of the monument, it was necessary to elaborate a sampling strategy comprehensive of different issues.

Although on one hand the fact of working with one particular stone type, sandstone, reduced the difficulty of dealing with very different minerals and textures, on the other hand the natural variability of the sedimentary rock made it difficult to establish a regular sampling strategy.

In order to take into account the unique characteristics of the sandstone, depositional layers and post-depositional features, it was necessary to elaborate a flexible sampling strategy that could be adapted to the morphology of the wall, allowing for a larger screening and reliable classification.

PARAGRAPH

In order to gather a large dataset and evaluate the reliability of different methods, we decided to combine three non-destructive and portable techniques:

Near Infrared portable probe, MicroNIR from JDSU (908–1676 nm, pixel to pixel interval 6.2 nm) with a sensor positioned between two integrated tungsten lamps measuring a surface of 5 by 5 mm.

The Micro probe is connected to a tablet and can be used for collecting point measurements.

Data acquisition time is a few seconds for each measurement.

The instrument was calibrated using a white reference (Spectralon) and spectra were recorded as absorbance scale.

Hyperspectral Imaging system.

NEO HySpex-320m-e (Norsk Elektro Optikk, Skedsmokorse, Norway), linescan push broom camera with 256 × 320 HgCdTe sensor and a PGP filter.

The camera records wavelenghts from 1000 nm to 2500 nm in 256 channels.

The instrument was mounted on a rail and moved horizontally through a computer-controlled stepping motor.

The distance between the target and the camera was set to 1 m so that the scanned width was about 25 cm and the size of each pixel 408 × 261 μm.

Scans of larger portions of the wall were obtained juxtaposing several image bands, while the height of the instrument was controlled by moving the rail up and down with a pulley system.

For each location of interest, the acquired stripes have been concatenated in a hyperspectral image approximately measuring one square metre.

Reflectance images were obtained by scaling the hyperspectral images using a white reference (Spectralon, Labsphere) held on the target and recorded for each image.

The resulting images were converted to absorbance scale (−log10).

Portable X-ray fluorescence spectrometer.

A battery-driven Thermo Scientific Niton XL3t ED-XRF analyser was used for collecting spectra on the surface of each analysed element in the masonry.

The instrument was used for complementing the MicroNIR measurements, it was supplied with a 50 kV X-ray tube, an Ag target, and a Si-PIN detector with a resolution of 175 eV at Mn Kα (5.895 keV).

The recordings were divided into 15 s intervals where three different filter and tube settings were employed.

The light filter mode, designed for measuring light elements (for example Si and P), applied no filter and a tube voltage of 6.2 kV.

Low and main filter modes were set with tube voltages of 20 and 40 kV respectively.

ED-XRF spectra were collected in 0.015 keV intervals (bins) from 0 to 60 keV, resulting in spectra composed by 4000 data points.

PARAGRAPH

Combined measurements were conducted on four sampled portions of the wall, chosen in order to include a wide selection of different materials and construction phases (Fig. 1b).

The documentation was carried out directly in the field using tablets, marking down the analysed masonry elements and the position of hyperspectral images on rectified orthophotos (Fig. 2).

PARAGRAPH

In total, four portions of the inner wall were analysed (Fig. 1), and a composite database comprehensive of images and point measurements was collected (Table 2).

PARAGRAPH

The sampling strategy was aimed at overlapping the measurements as much as possible in order to compare the different datasets.

While one hyperspectral image includes several stone elements close to each other and measures the entire external surface, point measurements performed with the MicroNIR probe or with the ED-XRF had to be accumulated in different spots for each module.

Five measurements for each stone module were collected with the MicroNIR in random position while the XRF readings were repeated three times.

All the masonry elements analysed with the portable XRF have mirror measurements conducted with the MicroNIR probe.

All stone types/phases scanned with the hyperspectral camera have also been analysed with MicroNIR/XRF, most of the times the measurements are overlapped on the same modules.

PARAGRAPH

The three methods deliver information about different qualities of materials.

Both the Hyperspectral camera and the MicroNIR probe collect spectral features relative to the vibration of molecules in the Near Infrared band of the electromagnetic spectrum.

NIR spectra are comprehensive of a large range of information about the materials, grain size, mineral composition, presence of water.

ED-XRF spectrometer was used for elemental analysis.

In Fig. 3 spectra recorded with the three instruments are compared for two masonry elements (R1 and R2) located in the zone 4 and both belonging to the Phase 5 (13th–14th century).

Spectra recorded with the hyperspectral camera (Fig. 3a) show peaks related to the presence of clay minerals in the sandstone, in particular illite (Bowitz and Ehling, 2008).

NIR spectra collected with the portable probe, five per stone, show a vertical shift for each curve due to the variation of grain size in the measured spot while XRF spectra display a consistent presence of Ca, Fe and Sr.

SECTION

Calculation

PARAGRAPH

The large number of different variables contained in spectral data was modelled applying multivariate statistics.

Exploratory analysis in archaeological datasets by the means of multivariate statistics is common and carried out in different contexts (Baxter, 2003), particularly to achieve a certain degree of simplification of large datasets.

Each stone element was categorised according to chronology (Table 1, Fig. 2), defined through the stratigraphic observations conducted on the whole inner wall (Faucherre et al., 2016).

The single datasets, created with each analytical instrument, were explored through principal component analysis (PCA) in order to reduce variability in the information and identifying clusters of materials with the same mineral/elemental composition.

The local models allowed evaluation of the produced datasets, identifying eventual outliers due to scattering effect.

PARAGRAPH

The hyperspectral images were processed through two consecutive steps of multivariate modelling.

The spectral bands below 1000 nm were removed because they were very noisy and pre-processing algorithms were applied, such as mean centring and Standard Normal Variate (SNV) correction to reduce spectral noise and eliminate scattering effects or interference.

A PCA was then conducted on the images, calculating a scatter plot of the pixels according to their spectral value (Fig. 4a–b).

The clustering was mostly influenced by vibration of molecules of AlOH and OH in the combination bands region as shown in the loading line vectors plot (Fig. 4c).

Different sandstone types could be distinguished due to size and mineralogy of grains and the presence of clay minerals (Bowitz and Ehling, 2008).

The PCA components value, in this case t[1], can also be visualized as colour composite on the original image (Fig. 4a).

PARAGRAPH

The hyperspectral images so created show the variability of texture and composition for entire portions of masonry.

It is possible to distinguish clearly each block of sandstone from the mortar binder and highlight the variations within single stone elements.

In order to obtain a dataset comprehensive of data from all images, the spectral information was averaged at the stone level.

Through this procedure, it was possible to obtain a spectral signature for each stone module, reducing markedly the size of the dataset without losing too much information about variability on the surface of materials.

PARAGRAPH

A new PCA model was then calculated on the averaged dataset, the construction phases recorded for each element were added as categorical attributes to the spectral values and visualized as shape/grayscale code in the scatter plot (Fig. 5).

PARAGRAPH

The measurements collected with the MicroNIR were pre-processed in the same way.

Spectra were mean centred and the SNV correction was applied.

The PCA model was then calculated on the data matrix choosing the same shape/grayscale code according to the construction phase (Fig. 6).

PARAGRAPH

XRF spectra were reduced by removing bins with low, or no, signals resulting in light, low and main filter sizes of 0–2.8 keV, 2.8–7.0 keV and 7.0–19.0 keV, respectively.

The data were then normalized, dividing each spectral value (counts/s) by the corresponding X-ray tube current value obtained from the instrument parameter file.

A PCA was calculated by pre-processing the data matrix with Pareto scaling to reduce the relevance of large values in the model still preserving the general data structure (Fig. 7).

SECTION

Discussion

PARAGRAPH

The PCA model of the averaged values from hyperspectral images shows distinct patterns.

The first three components are relevant to highlight clusters relative to the presence of certain minerals in the sandstone (Fig. 5, see loading lines for this PCA in the supplementary materials, Fig.5b).

In particular, spectral features associated to the presence of clay minerals, vibration of AlOH and OH, are useful variable to discriminate among the masonry elements (Bowitz and Ehling, 2008).

The cluster distribution corresponds to the variability of the raw materials used in the construction that can be interpreted according to chronological and stratigraphic references.

Illitic sandstones are used for the phase 1 and 4, Kaolinitic ones for the phase 2 and part of phase 5.

The masonry elements considered to be dated within phase 2 (3rd century) seem to have different provenience (Fig. 5).

Two types can be distinguished a green-grey glauconitic sandstone and a yellow illitic one.

PARAGRAPH

Similar trends can be observed in the model created from the MicroNIR measurements.

The spectral signatures obtained with this instrument are less informative, as the bands measured cover only the interval between 1000 nm and 1700 nm.

The spectra collected with this probe are more informative about the physical characteristics of the objects, grain size and shape, together with vibration signals of OH and H2O molecules in the first and second overtone.

In the model (Fig. 6), we can observe clustering patterns comparable to the ones observed in the hyperspectral data.

PARAGRAPH

The ED-XRF measurements display relevant concentrations of Ca and Fe with Sr and Si (see Fig. 7; the loading histograms with the mentioned peaks can be found in the supplementary materials, Fig. 7b).

PARAGRAPH

Near Infrared spectroscopy and X-Ray fluorescence spectroscopy are techniques targeted to the analysis of different characteristics in materials.

If XRF can be used to estimate the presence of defined chemical elements, NIR measurements result in spectra that are the sum of molecular vibrations and therefore are comprehensive of physical information such as texture or humidity (water content).

In order to associate the information potential of these techniques, it was decided to combine measurements obtained with the two hand-held probes: MicroNIR and XRF.

Two data matrices on the same measured samples were merged using an O2PLS model (orthogonal projection to latent structures; Trygg, 2002), the XRF spectra were pre-processed through Pareto scaling and coupled with second-derivative NIR spectra.

The resulting model (Fig. 8), calculated for the measurements performed on the zone 1 (Fig. 2), shows variability both for XRF and NIR data.

After combining the spectral information, the patterns observed in the local models are enhanced.

PARAGRAPH

As observed from the spectra collected with the different methods, different types of sandstone have been used in the construction.

This evidence could suggest a variability of raw materials supply, from distinct quarrying sites located in the area.

The rock types can be distinguished according to elemental composition and presence of precise minerals.

Integration of analytical data and stratigraphic observations reveal a more complex scenario of materials usage and organization of the working site.

Blocks made of different raw materials are included in patches of wall that present homogeneous formal characteristics (in terms of size of stones and joints).

The explanation for this analytical evidence could be found in the organization of the supply strategy and the procedure of construction.

During the several phases of construction, some elements could have been reused from older structures standing in the area; this could be the case for the glauconitic green sandstone blocks used as foundation for the Late Antiquity towers (Phase 2, 2b).

The distinct composition and origin of reused elements would be the explanation for the clustering detected in the models, showing a substantial difference between the big blocks and the smaller elements on regular beds characterising the third century construction.

While the first ones were reused, the latter were probably quarried on purpose and coming from a different source.

We could therefore assume that distinct supply strategies of stone materials could coexist on the construction site, and batches of raw materials could come from different sites (quarries or older constructions) and be dressed directly by stonemasons on the workshop before being fixed onto the building.

PARAGRAPH

Another interesting case is one of the stone elements dated to construction phase 4 (13th century).

The blocks belonging to this group seem to have a quite homogeneous mineralogical composition, and the 13th century segments of the wall were built according to a regular scheme.

This regularity in the masonry is to be attributed to the fact that the reconstruction of the wall dated after the last siege was performed after a direct order from the king.

Royal engineers travelled to Carcassonne accompanied by stonemasons, or recruiting local workers, to supervise the construction.

We can imagine that for such a big operation and economic investment the material supply must have been more regular, probably with batches of stone shipped from one big quarrying site selected for the purpose.

Such a scenario would explain the homogeneity in the composition of the materials dated to the 13th century.

SECTION

Conclusion

PARAGRAPH

The instruments used for the study provided interesting results and granted good accuracy.

Probes such as portable NIR and portable ED-XRF allow collection of fast point measurements and can be carried by one person.

The recordings can be multiplied to guarantee a good coverage of samples, and the data matrices can be statistically merged to enhance the information.

The combination of MicroNIR and ED-XRF can be used as a screening method for classification of lithic materials in various field situations but does not guarantee a very detailed mineralogical characterization.

The imaging system is less portable but results in a more complex datasets, encompassing chemical information and its spatial variability, highlighting the complexity of the materials' surfaces.

The imaging system can be moved around an object, but have height limits.

Considering this issue, we envisage associating the NEO HySpex camera with drone imaging in order to reach higher portions of the building.

PARAGRAPH

The spectra extracted for each stone element have been shown useful for detecting clay minerals while configuration of absorption bands display grain size and shape, XRF spectra contained information about elemental composition of the masonry.

The data collected were suitable for distinguishing different types of sandstone used in the construction, comparing and combining distinct datasets, by means of multivariate statistics.

Different types of sandstone could be associated with the observed chronological phases to shed light on diachronic variability of raw materials usage in the construction.

PARAGRAPH

This study is preliminary and provides a first test of the application of non-destructive spectral techniques for characterization of building materials in-situ.

The results described are promising and will be further implemented with a screening of sandstone outcrops available in the plain to identify possible supply sources.

Moreover, the analysis will be performed on larger stretches of masonry and other monuments of the citadel in order to delineate large scale dynamics of building materials supply and organization of labour in the working site.

If the study of archive documents and historical records gives us clues about why and when the military architecture was built and restored, the materials tell us how the construction was erected.

A close examination of stones and their characteristics helps us to shed light on the stories of unrecalled quarrymen, stonemasons and their craft, building a wall that nowadays represents an iconic monument in southern France.