10.1016/j.jhep.2019.01.012

ABSTRACT

TITLE

Outcomes of treatment for hepatitis C in prisoners using a nurse-led, statewide model of care

PARAGRAPH

Treatment programs for people who inject drugs (PWID), including prisoners, are important for achieving hepatitis C elimination targets.

There are multiple barriers to treatment of hepatitis C in prisons, including access to specialist physicians, testing and antiviral therapy, short prison sentences, and frequent inter-prison transfer.

We aimed to assess the effectiveness of a nurse-led model of care for the treatment of prisoners with hepatitis C.

PARAGRAPH

A statewide program for assessment and management of hepatitis C was developed in Victoria, Australia to improve access to care for prisoners.

This nurse-led model of care is supported by telemedicine to provide decentralized care within all prisons in the state.

We prospectively evaluated the feasibility and efficacy of this nurse-led model of care for hepatitis C within the 14 adult prisons over a 13-month period.

The primary endpoint was sustained virological response at post-treatment week 12 (SVR12) using per protocol analysis.

PARAGRAPH

There were 416 prisoners included in the analysis.

The median age was 41 years, 90% were male, 50% had genotype 3 and 44% genotype 1 hepatitis C and 21% had cirrhosis.

Injecting drug use was reported by 68% in the month prior to prison entry, 54% were receiving opioid substitution therapy, and 86% reported never previously engaging with specialist HCV care.

Treatment duration was 8 weeks in 24%, 12 weeks in 59%, and 24 weeks in 17% of treatment courses.

The SVR12 rate was 96% (301/313) per protocol.

Inter-prison transfer occurred during 26% of treatment courses but was not associated with lower SVR12 rates.

No treatment-related serious adverse events occurred.

PARAGRAPH

Hepatitis C treatment using a decentralized, nurse-led model of care is highly effective and can reach large numbers of prisoners.

Large scale prison treatment programs should be considered to support hepatitis C elimination efforts.

