10.1016/j.jasrep.2018.11.030

FULLTEXT

TITLE

A handful of fractured bifaces. “Caching” hunter-gatherer variability in the Tar River valley (Santa Cruz, Argentine Patagonia)

SECTION

Introduction

PARAGRAPH

The discussion regarding the peopling of Patagonia has been enriched by the gradual incorporation of new studied places.

One of these is the basin of lakes Tar and San Martín, located in the southwest of Santa Cruz province, Argentina, at the foot of the Andes mountain range, which occupies the western end of a large glacial valley that operates as a cul-de-sac.

First hunter-gatherer settlement of the basin began around 11,200–10,800 cal years BP under arid conditions at the onset of the Holocene.

The region seems to have been only occasionally occupied until ca. 5500 cal.

years BP.

By the Late Holocene and until historical times, the frequency of radiocarbon dates increases coinciding with the stabilization of local environmental conditions (Belardi et al., 2010, 2013).

PARAGRAPH

Regional archaeological research followed a distributional approach (Foley, 1981) seeking diversity in hunter-gatherer artifactual signal and landscape use.

Differences in artifactual densities as well as in site function suggest a main residential use of the eastern steppe compared to a logistical marginal use of the forested western side of the basin (Belardi et al., 2010).

By the same token, the valley floor in the steppe has been used on a year-round basis compared to a seasonal incorporation (end of spring and summer) of the surrounding basaltic plateaus.

The later landscape has a heavy signature of activities related to guanaco (Lama guanicoe) hunting using blinds, as well as in engraved rock art located along the basaltic walls of several ponds that have been occupied as residential spots.

So, a logistical use but with residential components could be proposed for the plateaus (Belardi et al., 2017).

Similarities in rock art motifs, raw material circulation (mostly obsidian from the Pampa del Asador and limolite from the Cardiel Lake, both sources located northwards), together with the built landscape of hunting blinds in the plateaus, and projectile point types allowed to relate the Tar and San Martín Basin to those located both to the north and south, placing this one in the broader discussion of the peopling and human dynamics of southwestern Patagonia.

It is within this general archaeological frame that Los Bifaces site appears as an outlier given its depositional and technological characteristics.

Even so, our study will try to show that the site is just one more piece of the regional archaeological landscape variability.

PARAGRAPH

Los Bifaces site is analyzed by taking the technological characteristics of the assemblage into account (see a first description in Espinosa and Belardi, 2016).

This site is located in the upper course of Tar River (815 m.a.s.l.), near the foot of Cardiel Chico plateau (Fig. 1), in a grassy steppe environment where the climatic type corresponds to cold weather conditions, with average temperatures ranging between 0° and 12 °C.

Summers are cool and winters are cold to very cold due to the invasion of polar and subpolar winds (Oliva et al., 2001).

PARAGRAPH

The site is characterized by the presence of bifaces on the edge of a shallow pond that is currently dry (Fig. 2a).

Seventy-eight (78) bifacial fragments distributed over a surface of 2 m2 were registered (Fig. 2b).

The refitting of 32 fragments served to identify at least 11 bifaces.

Given the elevation of the site, its incorporation into hunter-gatherer mobility circuits would have been feasible towards the end of spring-summer.

PARAGRAPH

Next, we describe and evaluate the social context of the deposition of the biface assemblage.

In the first place, the use of bifacial technology in the Tar and San Martín lakes basin will be considered in order to ponder the importance of the assemblage under study, and secondly, the implemented methodology will be introduced and the technological features of the artifacts analyzed.

Based on such information, different hypotheses related to natural causes as well as to caching behavior (Franco et al., 2017; Hurst, 2017), costly signaling (Quinn, 2015) and rituality will be discussed in order to account for the assemblage formation and its integration to the archeology of Tar and San Martín Lakes Basin.

PARAGRAPH

Even when the assemblage could not be dated, it is proposed that it is related to the first moments of occupation of the basin.

The artifacts found in Los Bifaces site along with their depositional conditions and formation are novel for the region and they add variability to the archeology of southern Patagonia.

SECTION

Projectile points, long edges and bifaces

PARAGRAPH

Bifacial artifact manufacturing technique is laborious, requiring a greater use of energy than other techniques (Hayden et al., 1996; Andrefsky Jr, 1998).

This means that the higher presence of typological varieties that are bifacially manufactured implies better knowledge of the technique, as these may be considered the work of a specialized craftsman (Aschero and Hocsman, 2004:21).

PARAGRAPH

Three decades ago, Kelly (1988) argued that a biface can be used as a core, as a long life-use tool or as a shaping by-product.

The bifacial technique can be related to the “way of doing” and the type of resource to be used (Aschero and Hocsman, 2004).

Additionally, bifacial design is reliable, maintainable and transportable (Bleed, 1986), which entails planning the future use of such artifacts (Kuhn, 1989).

Likewise, this technology can also be associated with the preservation of raw materials (Bamforth, 1986; Kelly, 1988).

PARAGRAPH

Given its location in a glacial environment framed by basaltic plateaus, the Tar and San Martín Lakes Basin presents high availability of regional lithic raw materials (see Espinosa et al., 2015).

The bifacial technique has a broad spatial distribution and has been used in a wide range of designs.

While 5.27% (N = 341) of the lithic artifacts found in this basin have been manufactured using this technique, other basins showed lower percentages: e.g. 1.43% (N = 62) in Perito Moreno National Park or 4.38% (N = 162) in Cardiel-Strobel Lakes Basin (Fig. 1).

53.66% (N = 174) of bifacial pieces found in Tar and San Martín Lakes Basin are shaped and/or regularized over a bifacial preform tool or a product of the bifacial technique (biface, core, projectile point, bifacial thinning flake).

PARAGRAPH

The main group of bifacial artifacts in the region is made up of obsidian stemmed triangular projectile points, and this design is associated with Late Holocene occupations (see Belardi et al., 2013).

Another group that stands out is that of bifacial long edges, which have flat and deep bifacial thinning removal scars (Aschero, 1983; Nami, 1991; Aschero and Hocsman, 2004) which produce both a symmetrical and an asymmetrical edge.

On the asymmetrical section of the edge, the long edge of the side-scraper/knife is regularized.

The symmetrical section is a bifacial sinuous one that works as the back or passive edge.

This design is not exclusive to the basin and it presents a supra-regional spatial distribution that spans between 8000 years BP to late moments of occupation (Espinosa et al., 2013).

SECTION

Methodology

PARAGRAPH

Every artifact registered on the surface of Los Bifaces site was collected, and a test pit of 1 m2 by 8–10 cm deep was carried out, in which a highly consolidated clay layer was observed with no other findings.

The assemblage of bifaces was then analyzed taking into account raw materials, which were determined macroscopically based on granulometry, rock mass homogeneity and the presence of phenocrysts.

The presence of cortex and/or weathering was also found.

PARAGRAPH

The description of bifaces followed the typology developed by Aschero (1975, 1983) and the specific modifications on bifacial parts as defined by Aschero and Hocsman (2004), two of the most influential works on lithic studies in Patagonia.

Size was determined by measuring length, width and thickness both for each fragment and for refitted or whole pieces.

The general shape of the artifacts was also registered (amygdaloid, lanceolate, oval, semioval, triangular, rhomboidal, trapezoidal, biconvex), as well as the technical series (which measures the width of the different bifacial flaking options – see Bradley et al., 2010, Fig. 3.11), the length of the flake scars and cross section.

Based on bifaces design, the morphological and technological axes were evaluated, along with the presence of platforms, thickness and edges according to grip.

Likewise, following Nami (1986), size variation of bifacial artifacts was also analyzed depending on the manufacturing process: medium-large (from 60 to 79.9 mm) and large (from 80 to 119.9 mm) that require thinning, and very small (from 0.1 to 19.9 mm) and small (from 20 to 39.9 mm) that do not involve the creation of a previous biface.

PARAGRAPH

However, the main highlight of the site is the high index of fractures on bifaces.

Fractures can provide a vast amount of information regarding both the state of conservation of lithic assemblages and the reliability of the sample (Espinosa, 2002; Nami and Bellelli, 1994).

A conservative approach was used in order to analyze only the minimum number of fractures.

To this end, only parts that could be refitted were considered, which means that the number of fractures on each biface was determined in connection with the whole part that was obtained so that, for instance, three fragments may represent the result of a single fracture.

PARAGRAPH

To determine the origin of the fractures, the action of post-depositional agents was taken into account: trampling and thermoclastism, as well as cultural causes.

In this respect, the classification of intentional fractures on lithic artifacts proposed and developed by Weitzel (2011) was used, which is the result of a very rich and diverse line of research and experimentation (Crabtree, 1972; Cotterell and Kamminga, 1979; Deller and Ellis, 2001; Fisher et al., 1984; Frison and Bradley, 1980; Johnson, 1979, 1981, among others).

Such classification comprises three main types of fractures: radial, straight or snap and complete cone.

Straight or snap fractures are perpendicular to the major axis of the artifact and they begin on one side of the piece which shows evidence of the point of percussion and can present a lip.

The position is transverse to the orientation axis of the piece.

Radial fractures produce a series of gaps that originate from the point of impact towards the edges in a radial pattern.

Impact also occurs on one side of the tool, and the resulting fragments can be triangular or wedged.

Lastly, complete cone fractures produce a Hertzian cone that goes from the side that received the impact to the opposite side.

The piece is then fragmented in two by means of a straight fracture.

Even in those cases in which Hertzian cones are usually splintered their scars can still be observed after reffiting.

PARAGRAPH

Additionally, we also analyzed whether the deposition of bifaces and the origin of fractures could be temporally unrelated.

In such case, the existence of differential weathering on the face of the artifacts as well as on fracture scars is a diagnostic feature that allows identifying signs of stability in depositional environments (Guichón et al., 2000).

SECTION

Description and analysis of the assemblage

PARAGRAPH

Los Bifaces site comprises 78 fragments of tools that were manufactured from raw materials that are not available in the surrounding areas.

Thirty two fragments that make up 11 pieces in various stages of biface manufacturing (2 to 4 sensu Nami, 1986) were assembled (Table 1 and Fig. 3, G, A and B).

Refitted artifacts account for about 70% of each biface, with a variation ranging from 25% (Fig. 3, H) to 100%, (Fig. 3, E).

Although only two fragments of Biface F could be refitted, we considered that the other three belong to this biface, given that these five fragments were the only ones on sandstone.

From the remaining 46 fragments and based on the presence of platforms, three more bifaces were identified.

However, they were not included in the analyses because their size was too small to allow the recognition of their shape or actual size.

PARAGRAPH

A thin section analysis was performed on a fragment of the most used raw material within the assemblage, which concluded that it is a vitrophyre of intermediate composition, possibly andesitic to dacitic.

It is similar to the characteristics of rocks that are found in Pampa del Asador, located 125 linear km towards the NNE.

It is worth mentioning that the assemblage contains only one non-fractured basalt piece of unifacial manufacturing.

It has amygdaloid shape, cortex and weathering on the flaked surface.

The scars reach the center of the piece.

A knife was manufactured on the left sharp edge.

PARAGRAPH

The presence of cortex is low, accounting for just 7% of the sample (two bifaces with cortical striking platforms and three bifaces with <25% of cortex on both sides).

This, in accordance with the size of the bifaces shows that their blanks could have been pebbles and/or large or very large flakes (over 250 mm).

Some pieces have weathering on just one side, which indicates stability (Guichón et al., 2000).

PARAGRAPH

In the case of bifaces A, C and D (Table 1), it could be determined that the blank was a flake, as platforms could be observed.

According to technomorphology, bifaces have deep extended or partially extended flake scars, and a biconvex or flat-convex cross section.

Bifacial thinning requires a centered platform with a longitudinal symmetry plane.

This means that manufacturing is planned in order to reduce thickness and produce a specific section.

This design is different from bifacial long edges (Espinosa et al., 2013) because these are not the result of modifying a biface, as thinning is not symmetrical in the actual case.

PARAGRAPH

The bifaces are large in size (between 74 and 152 mm in length and width), supporting the use of bifacial thinning (Nami, 1986).

Besides, they have resharpening potential.

In terms of thickness, 69.23% were between 10 and 13.9 mm and the remaining 30.76% between 16 and 17.9 mm.

These thickness ranges are not sufficiently distinct from each other to allow recognizing a complete bifacial reduction sequence.

So, these bifaces may not have been the flake blanks of any final product according to Nami (1986), such as projectile points.

They are, instead, final products on their own.

Based on their symmetry and the observed technical series the largest pieces seem to have a similar design.

PARAGRAPH

In order to establish edge regularization, flake scar widths at the edge of the biface were measured considering the following categories: 1 to 7 mm (13.4%); 7.1 to 10 mm (47.82%) and ≥10 mm (39.13%).

In the studied assemblage just biface B presents a regularized edge which corresponds to a knife.

Neither morphological nor technological homogeneity can be observed.

Even more, in four cases the orientation of the morphological axis differs from the technological one.

In three bifaces (B, D and E) the first axis is leaning to the left and to the right in the remaining piece (A) (Table 1).

PARAGRAPH

Each refitted biface presents an average of 2 to 3 fragments, which signals a trend or fracture pattern.

The predominance of straight or snap fractures can be observed (N = 30; 43.8%) followed by seven radial fractures (10.62%), and two cone fractures (3.37%) (Fig. 4), all of which have been characterized as intentional fractures (Weitzel, 2011).

Related to the impact that caused the fractures, biface B contains at least 5 strikes, while the remaining artifacts seem to have only one.

It is important to note that no knapping waste was found, which means that the artifacts had already been manufactured when they were deposited.

Fractures originate on the face, which shows the intentional nature of the strike.

Faces are flat or concave and have eraillure flakes.

The fracture initiation or impact points can also be observed.

Bifaces B, C and E have stepped termination on the fractures.

In the case of biface D, the fracture is interrupted by the natural hardness of the rock.

PARAGRAPH

In a few fragments (N = 3; 4.3%), the lateral fracture was a consequence of a manufacturing error.

However, these fractures may have been made to weaken the piece by facilitating the fracture with another strike on one of the sides (Crabtree, 1972; Rondeau (1981).

On the other hand, microscopic examination did not reveal any splinters or microfractures on the active edges of such fragments.

Those fragments that could not be refitted also contain a clear pattern of straight (92.3%), cone (2.56%) and curved (2.56%) fractures.

The remaining fractures (2.56%) were undetermined.

Therefore, evidence suggests that bifaces presented intentional fractures.

SECTION

Discussion and conclusions

PARAGRAPH

The representation of the bifacial technique of Los Bifaces site is unique in the record of Tar and San Martín Lakes Basin (with an average of 5.27%).

On the one hand, although certain bifaces are in their initial stage of manufacture (sensu Nami, 1986), from both the point of view of the applied technique and morphology, they are artifacts that stand out from the other bifacial types that were registered all along the basin.

On the other hand, they have been manufactured on rocks that are not local but available in the region- vitrophyre, basalt and sandstone- which only reach an average relative frequency of 9% in the basin (Espinosa et al., 2015).

As mentioned before, the absence of debitage and debris, especially primary flakes, indicates that the tools were manufactured somewhere else and then transported and deposited at the site.

PARAGRAPH

A key feature of the bifaces assemblage of is that all pieces are concentrated in a surface of only 2 m2 which may lead us to interpret the finding as a cache, i.e. a place where artifacts, food, and/or equipment are stored and/or hidden for future use.

Likewise, artifacts are grouped and with high percentage of refitting, there are no traces of manufacturing and/or maintenance, and the only activity associated with them is their deposition (Franco, 2002; Franco et al., 2017; Huckell and Kilby, 2014; Hurst, 2017).

Then, the materials found in Los Bifaces site would likely correspond to a single deposition event.

PARAGRAPH

Following a recent summary of cache types carried out by Hurst (2017), caches can be grouped into: a) insurance: those created to face risks in future resource processing activities; b) passive: those designed to process specific resources that are temporally and spatially predictable; c) load exchange: those where an extra raw material that has been acquired recently is deposited, as it is difficult to transport it along with the raw material that was being carried, and without the certainty of returning in a next visit; and d) spiritual sites: where the contents are not expected to be discovered or which have no other use.

PARAGRAPH

Likewise, Kilby and Huckell (2014) point to the importance of caches as they provide information regarding the manufacturing and maintenance of the artifacts they contain, as they are “windows” through which we can see the way in which tool kits were arranged, we can learn about mobility and the use of space and about the social organization and ritual aspects of the societies that formed such caches.

Additionally, these also show aspects of regional variation of their behavior.

PARAGRAPH

Since no shelter or structure was evident, the assemblage of Los Bifaces is thought to have been deposited in the place where it was found: the edge of a shallow pond, as some bifacial fragments contain impregnated sediment on just the side that lies on the ground.

PARAGRAPH

Open-air caches have also been recorded in other regions in southern Santa Cruz, as in the west of Brazo Sur site in Argentino Lake (Franco, 2002), in small rocky cavities such as La Gruta and El Verano, in the Central Plateau (Franco et al., 2011, 2017) and possibly in lava tunnels like Trampa Mala Cueva site in Chilean Pali Aike (Martin and San Román, 2010) as well.

With the exception of the assemblage found in Brazo Sur, there is a predominance of bifacial artifacts in all of the sites.

This is remarkable in the mesoregional context where unifacial artifacts dominate the landscape (Franco et al., 2017; Martin and San Román, 2010), as is also the case in Tar and San Martín Lakes Basin.

It is clear that in Patagonia we can expect to find caches in a wide range of contexts and with technological differences.

In this sense, Los Bifaces site adds variability to the known assemblages.

PARAGRAPH

Despite the absence of a record that can be radiocarbondated, several lines converge in pointing out that Los Bifaces site could be correlated with the moment of colonization of the region (sensu Borrero, 1994–1995; see Franco et al., 2011, 2017).

First of all, it is worth noting the similarity in the deposit of bifaces with the caches in La Gruta and El Verano sites, located around 190 km to the Northeast.

The regional available chronology settles these sites around 9000–8000 years BP.

The pieces present similar morphology and raw materials (siliceous) to those artifacts associated with the colonization of the Central Plateau (Franco et al., 2011, 2017).

It is understood that these two caches, along with that found in Brazo Sur, would mark the end of the range of scattered hunter-gatherer populations (see Franco et al., 2017).

Los Bifaces could fit this description given its location adjacent to the Tar River valley, which connects the Cardiel Chico plateau with the basin of Tar and San Martín Lakes Basin (Fig. 1).

Materials that are deposited towards the ends of the usual ranges of activity are more likely to be forgotten.

Once those spaces are incorporated into the circulation dynamics of populations they cease to be necessary, given that the landscape is already known by hunter-gatherers.

In this sense, Tar-San Martín Lakes Basin may have been marginal within the mobility strategies of hunter-gatherer populations, taking into account the low intensity of landscape use in a mesoregional scale (Borrero, 2004; Belardi et al., 2010).

Therefore, Los Bifaces assemblage would correspond to a cache that may have been deposited during the moment of colonization of the basin, after 9700 years BP.

PARAGRAPH

Another relevant feature of the artifact assemblage found in Los Bifaces site is the high fracture index, which marks a clear difference between the caches that were newly mentioned.

The absence of differential weathering on the faces of the pieces and in the fracture scars would indicate that the fracture occurred immediately after the deposition of the artifacts.

However, the lack of knowledge regarding the timing of weathering formation does not allow us to rule out that both actions may have been unrelated.

PARAGRAPH

The matrix on which the bifaces were deposited, on the edge of a pool characterized by fine and permeable sediments, reduces the chances of fracture by trampling, either by humans or guanaco (Lama guanicoe), a camelid of over 100 kg that has been the main prey for hunter-gatherers in Patagonia.

There is no evidence of thermoclastism either, despite seasonal variations in temperature.

In turn, the technological study indicates that the fracture was intentional.

What could have caused this?

PARAGRAPH

Although many fragments can be refitted some are missing.

Burial in the very same site does not seem to be the cause as the test pit showed the absence of archaeological materials.

Other possibility to be taken into account could be related to the fracture of bifaces to obtain thin pieces with an active edge of smaller size for subsequent transport.

Nevertheless, if this had been the cause of fracture of the bifaces, a big part of the fragments –suitable for further use- remained in the site or were not used, as was the case with the whole unifacial piece.

Besides no artifacts manufactured based on these type of fragments have been recorded in the different archaeological contexts analyzed in the basin.

Additionally, the region is characterized by the high availability of rocks that can be used for knapping (Espinosa et al., 2015), which means that conservation strategies for this raw material are not to be expected.

Then, missing biface fragments are probably buried beyond the two square meters where most pieces were found, showing that even a low energy pond has its own dynamic.

PARAGRAPH

Artifacts whose manufacture involved more energy than the average technological assemblages found in the region were fractured intentionally; high-quality rocks were used for knapping and the fracture was not mainly associated with either minimizing raw material waste or the use of active edges.

This opens the possibility to a case of costly signaling (see Austin, 2015; Quinn, 2015).

The fracture of the bifaces would have been costly in terms of waste, both of the energy invested in the technique and of the quality of the raw materials in a highly visible context.

The meaning of such behavior is related to the achievement of greater reproductive success by those who exhibit such behavior (Quinn, 2015, among others).

This means that the explanation requires the identification of a competitive context where the signal can be interpreted as such.

PARAGRAPH

If the bifaces had been deposited on the edges of the home range of a population, we could state that the cache may have been created by a group of hunters that were immersed within the colonization phase, when the initial consolidation of hunter-gatherers in the region was taking place (Borrero, 1994–1995).

In this context, the receivers of the conspicuous signal of the fracture of the bifaces and the scenario of social competition would involve the few members that make up a group of hunters.

Even in the event that the deposition and intentional fracture may have been temporally unrelated, the argument that states that the fracture of artifacts is an indication of costly signaling is still valid.

In this regard, the nature of the cache would have had a ritual component which differs, at least in part, from Schiffer's definition (1987:79) for these type of caches: “as a reasonably discrete concentration of artifacts, usually not found in a secondary refuse deposit; in addition, ritual caches generally contain complete artifacts, sometimes unused that are intact or easily restored”.

PARAGRAPH

In the south of Patagonia, there are two cases of sites that contain chert bifaces that have been considered as having ritual components.

The first of these is the already mentioned Trampa Mala Cueva, at the base of a lava tube, which is 13 m deep and very difficult to reach.

The materials that were found in the cave had a thick coat of ochre and were dated 660 years BP (Martin and San Román, 2010).

The other site is a multiple human burial recorded on the top of Morro Philippi (a volcanic neck) (Ortíz Troncoso, 1973), on the Upper Gallegos River Basin in Argentina.

It has no radiocarbon dates.

Corpses were covered with red-ochre pigments and then sealed with rocks –a type of Patagonian burial called “chenque”-, that is related to the Late Holocene (Goñi et al., 2000–2002).

At least 16 flint pieces were deposited, 10 of which have been informed and described.

The great size of the bifaces stands out, which range between 282 mm and 128 mm, and they would comprise a grave goods (Ortíz Troncoso, 1973).

Los Bifaces site differs from both contexts in the intentional fracture of the artifacts, the absence of ochre, and possibly in the chronology.

PARAGRAPH

Similar cases of final Pleistocene-Early Holocene sites that have been interpreted as ritual or symbolic have also been recorded in North America, such as the McNine assemblage in Nevada (USA) (Amick, 2004) or Caradoc site in Ontario (Canada) (Deller and Ellis, 2001).

The latter contains an assemblage of fractured bifaces and thinning flakes with traces of use, and some of them are impregnated with ochre.

However, the most prominent feature is the high index of fracture of the artifacts.

These sites have been characterized as ritual given the large size of the pieces, the evidence of abrasion (as was observed in overdesigned pieces, without determination of use, sensu Shea, 2017), platforms on the edges and the presence of mineral ochre.

On the other hand, Crowfield site, located 4 km to the southwest of Caradoc site (Ellis, 2009), contains artifacts that were manufactured in chert that is not available locally but in a radius of over l100 km.

All of these cases were associated with initial moments of occupation during the Paleoindian and the Pleistocene-Holocene transition.

Ellis (2009) shows in Fig. 6 the radial fracture of artifacts A, B, C and D and in Fig. 14 the straight or snap fracture of pieces A and E, all of which bear close resemblance to the Patagonian case here discussed.

PARAGRAPH

To conclude, Los Bifaces site represents a cache of bifacial artifacts that were fractured intentionally, which is unprecedented in the archaeological landscape of Tar and San Martín Lakes Basin.

Additionally, caches have little representation in south Patagonia.

The absence of chronology precludes going beyond a guess regarding its formation during the initial moments of settlement of the basin.

To assume that the deposition of the bifaces and their fracture is penecontemporaneous allows us to evaluate a likely case of costly signaling and rituality in hunter-gatherer contexts from high latitudes.

In this vein, the rigorous scrutiny of the material expectations derived from the presented arguments should be considered.